<span id="ck12_epub_licence.html"></span>

To access a customizable version of this book, as well as other
interactive content, visit [www.ck12.org](www.ck12.org)

 

<div style="text-align:justify">

CK-12 Foundation is a non-profit organization with a mission to reduce
the cost of textbook materials for the K-12 market both in the U.S. and
worldwide. Using an open-content, web-based collaborative model termed
the **FlexBook**®. CK-12 intends to pioneer the generation and
distribution of high-quality educational content that will serve both as
core text as well as provide an adaptive environment for learning,
powered through the **FlexBook Platform**®.

Copyright © 2014 CK-12 Foundation, www.ck12.org

The names "CK-12" and "CK12" and associated logos and the terms
"**FlexBook**®" and "**FlexBook Platform**®" (collectively "CK-12
Marks") are trademarks and service marks of CK-12 Foundation and are
protected by federal, state, and international laws.

Any form of reproduction of this book in any format or medium, in whole
or in sections must include the referral attribution link [**<span
style="color : #ff0000;">http://www.ck12.org/saythanks</span>**](saythanks)
(placed in a visible location) in addition to the following terms.

Except as otherwise noted, all CK-12 Content (including CK-12 Curriculum
Material) is made available to Users in accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC 3.0) License
([http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/]()), as amended and
updated by Creative Commons from time to time (the "CC License"), which
is incorporated herein by this reference.

Complete terms can be found at [http://www.ck12.org/terms](terms).

<!--<strong>ISBN :</strong>__isbn_number__ -->

</div>

<div>

![by-nc-na](images/by-nc.png)

</div>

<span id="ck12_author_attribution.html"></span>

 

 

 

<div style="text-align:center">

**Authors**\
Kevin Pyatt, Ph.D., Donald Calbreath, Ph.D.

<!-- <p><strong>Contributors</strong><br />__contributors__</p> -->
**Editors**\
Donald Calbreath, Ph.D., Max Helix

<!-- <p><strong>Sources/strong><br />__sources__</p> -->
<!-- <p><strong>Translated by</strong><br />__translators__</p> -->
<!-- <p><strong>Reviewers</strong><br />__reviewers__</p> -->
<!-- <p><strong>Technical Reviewers</strong><br />__technicalreviewers__</p> -->
<!-- <p><strong>Website </strong><br />__website__</p> -->
 

 

 

<small>Say Thanks to Authors\
 [Click http://ck12.org/saythanks](saythanks)\
 *(No Sign in required)* </small>

</div>

<span id="1.html"></span>

# Introduction to Chemistry {#1.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9uIHRvIENoZW1pc3RyeQ..-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_1_files/20151009235129687157.jpeg)
</span>

Diabetes mellitus is a disease characterized by the body’s inability to
regulate glucose levels. Glucose (a component of table sugar) is needed
to provide biochemical energy for all the cells of the body. When this
process is disrupted, the body begins to break down fat and protein to
provide the needed energy, which can eventually lead to death. Diabetes
is mediated by a protein called insulin. A key piece of our
understanding of diabetes came when Frederick Sanger, a British
biochemist, carried out experiments to determine the structure of the
insulin molecule. Sanger (shown in the opening image) used basic
chemistry techniques and reactions and took twelve years to complete his
research. Today, automated instruments based on his approach can perform
the same analysis in a matter of days. Sanger was awarded the Nobel
Prize in Chemistry in 1958 for his insulin research. The chemical
processes that won Sanger the Nobel Prize is pictured on the right in
the opening image. In this chapter, we will look at the history of
chemistry, see the many areas of our lives that are touched by
chemistry, and develop a basic understanding of what is involved in the
process of scientific discovery.

^Sanger\\ image:\\ Courtesy\\ of\\ the\\ National\\ Institutes\\ of\\ Health.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Frederick\_Sanger2.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

^Molecule:\\ User:Sponk/Wikimedia\\ Commons.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanger\_peptide\_end-group\_analysis.svg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686080] -->

# What is Chemistry? {#1.html#x-ck12-V2hhdCBpcyBDaGVtaXN0cnk_}

## Lesson Objectives {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-bij}

-   Define the term “chemistry.”
-   Describe the activities of alchemists and how they contributed to
    the modern science of chemistry.
-   List some of the key scientists from the early history of chemistry
    along with their primary contributions to the field.
-   List various modern items that have been developed through the study
    of chemistry.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-uju}

-   **chemistry** : The science of the properties, reaction,
    composition, and structures of matter.
-   **matter** : Anything that has mass and takes up space.
-   **alchemist** : A practitioner of the Medieval science of alchemy,
    which aimed mainly to transform everyday metals into gold.
-   **philosopher’s stone** : A substance that could cause the
    transmutation of lead into gold.

## A Brief History of Chemistry {#1.html#x-ck12-QSBCcmllZiBIaXN0b3J5IG9mIENoZW1pc3RyeQ..-ptc}

### What is Chemistry? {#1.html#x-ck12-V2hhdCBpcyBDaGVtaXN0cnk_-ysr}

If we look up the word “ **chemistry** ” in the dictionary, we’ll find
something like this: “The science of the composition, structure,
properties, and reactions of **matter** , especially of atomic and
molecular systems” (Free Online Dictionary). This definition is
accurate, but it does not give us a good picture of the scope of
chemistry or any practical aspects of the field.

Chemistry touches every area of our lives. The medicines we take, the
food we eat, the clothes we wear – all these materials and more are, in
some way or another, a product of chemistry. Later on in this chapter,
we will look in detail at some of the ways that chemistry contributes to
our lives.

### Where Did Chemistry Come From? {#1.html#x-ck12-V2hlcmUgRGlkIENoZW1pc3RyeSBDb21lIEZyb20_-ops}

Although the systematic study of chemistry is relatively new, chemical
techniques have been used for thousands of years. Some civilizations
kept good records of these techniques, which give us direct information
about what earlier people knew. Fields of study such as archaeology
provide additional information. Legends and folklore are also useful
tools to learn about the chemical knowledge of previous cultures.

Thousands of years ago, the ancient Egyptians used chemical practices to
develop techniques for producing perfumes and dyes. Studies of objects
found in Egyptian tombs show that materials for coloring fabrics were
known as far back as 2600 B.C.

Another area of chemistry that was highly developed by the early
Egyptians was metallurgy. Beginning in about 3400 B.C., records show a
highly developed technology for refining copper, gold, iron, and other
metals. Although the reasons these techniques worked were not fully
understood, the refiners were able to produce high-quality materials
that were used in jewelry, decorations, and money.

Glass production also appears to have been first developed by the
Egyptians (see **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV8zX0VneXB0aWFuX2dsYXNzX2phcg..) ). A
number of tomb paintings show glass-blowing and the manufacturing of
glass products. The glass was often colored, suggesting an understanding
of the use of dyes for decoration.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-MWEwYTNlZGRmYmI2ZTZhYTczMmFkYjRhYzY3MWNhOGI.-97x"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jon Bodsworth" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Egyptian_glass_jar.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any purpose including unrestricted redistribution, commercial use, and modification" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235129810144.jpeg)

**Figure 1.1**

This ancient Egyptian glass jar is over 3000 years old.

</div>

Various types of medicines were also discovered by many ancient people.
Records from civilizations around the world show that certain plants
were used for healing specific disorders and for dealing with pain. The
earliest medical “textbook” consisted of hundreds of clay tablets found
in Mesopotamia, dating from about 2600 B.C. These tablets had
information about thousands of plants and plant materials that had
beneficial effects. An Egyptian papyrus from around 1550 B.C had over
800 prescriptions and 700 natural materials that were used for medical
treatment (see **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV80X2FyYWJpY19oZXJi) ). The famous Greek
physician Hippocrates (460-377 B.C.) wrote about using lemon juice as a
laxative and an extract from the belladonna plant as an anesthetic.
Indian writings from around 900 B.C. describe the preparations of over
300 different medicines. Traditional Chinese medicine has records from
350 B.C. that describe over 240 medicinal preparations and 150 drug
combinations used to treat various ailments. Oral traditions from both
North and South America also describe preparations used for healing.
Some South American tribes used the venom from specific frogs (usually
very brightly colored ones) for poisons. The chemical properties of
these substances was not understood at the time, but chemical techniques
were often used to isolate and purify various useful materials.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-ZjdmMGVkOTY2YzU2MDhmZWRhZGIzODIyYTNkNDc5NTU.-gtp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Pedanius Dioscorides" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Arabic_herbal_medicine_guidebook.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235129926689.jpeg)

**Figure 1.2**

Pictures of herbal medicines. The Arabic text is from around 1330 A.D.

</div>

### The Rise and Fall of the Alchemists {#1.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFJpc2UgYW5kIEZhbGwgb2YgdGhlIEFsY2hlbWlzdHM.-ldc}

One area of technology present in all of the societies we have mentioned
was metallurgy. Properly refined metals could be made into useful tools
that could last a long time. Weapons could stay sharp longer with
improved metals. Additionally, precious metals such as gold and silver
could be refined and used in jewelry or as money. Because it was fairly
rare, gold was considered to be very valuable and became a common means
of paying for goods and services.

We don’t know exactly when humans began mining for gold. Items made from
gold have been found in Bulgarian graves that are over 7000 years old.
Archaeological studies show clear evidence of gold mining in many parts
of the world from over 4000 years ago. During the time of the Roman
Empire, the Romans had developed very sophisticated methods for
extracting gold from the earth.

However, mining for gold is a slow, dirty, and dangerous process.
Additionally, not everyone owns a gold mine – in both the ancient
Egyptian society and during the Roman Empire, the gold mines were the
property of the state and did not belong to any one individual or group.
As a result, there were few ways for most people to legally get any gold
for themselves.

The **alchemists** were a varied group of scholars and charlatans (
**Figure** [below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV81X0pvc2VwaF9MZW9wb2xk) ).
Two of the ultimate goals of alchemy were to create the **Philosopher’s
Stone** (which is a substance that could cause the transmutation of lead
into gold) and the Elixir of Life (which would bestow immortality on the
person who possessed it). The origin of the term “alchemy” is uncertain,
and the roots of this word are related to a number of Greek, Arabic, and
ancient Egyptian words. Three major branches of alchemy are known
(Chinese, Indian, and European), and all three have certain factors in
common. We will not focus on the philosophical or religious aspects of
alchemy, but we will look briefly at the techniques developed by
European alchemists that ultimately influenced the development of the
science of chemistry.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-ZDlmM2ViNjYyYTliZTMxN2YxNjQ0NmZhNmU1MmE4YTc.-cxt"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joseph Leopold Ratinckx" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Joseph_Leopold_Ratinckx_Der_Alchemist.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130075520.jpeg)

**Figure 1.3**

An alchemist at work on his laboratory.

</div>

Many of the specific approaches that alchemists used when they tried
changing lead into gold are vague and unclear. Each alchemist had his
own methods of recording data, and the processes were kept secret so
that others could not profit from them. Different scholars developed
their own set of symbols as they recorded the information they came up
with (see an example in **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV82X0RpZ2J5X3JhcmVzZWNyZXRz) ). Also,
many alchemists were not very honest; it was not uncommon for an
alchemist to take money from a nobleman by claiming to be able to make
gold from lead and then to leave town in the middle of the night.
Sometimes the nobleman would detect the fraud and have the alchemist
hung. By the 1300s, several European rulers had declared alchemy to be
illegal and set out strict punishments for those practicing the
alchemical arts.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-ZDIyZGJkYTY1ZTZhYzJmYTc1ZDVjNjY1MjRjYTU2YWQ.-hvs"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Kenelm Digby" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alchemy-Digby-RareSecrets.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130196534.png)

**Figure 1.4**

An alchemical procedure and symbols.

</div>

However, despite this secrecy several contributions were made to
modern-day chemistry. Early acids and bases were discovered, and
glassware for running chemical reactions was developed. Alchemy helped
improve the study of metallurgy and the extraction of metals from ores.
More systematic approaches to research were being developed, although
the idea of orderly scientific experimentation was not yet
well-established. The groundwork was being laid for the development of
chemistry as a foundational science.

The alchemists were never successful in changing lead into gold.
Remarkably, modern nuclear physics can accomplish this task. If lead is
subjected to nuclear bombardment in a particle accelerator, a small
amount of gold can eventually be obtained. However, the cost of this
procedure is far more than the value of the gold that can be obtained,
so the dream of the alchemists has never (and will never) come true.

### Events in the History of Chemistry {#1.html#x-ck12-RXZlbnRzIGluIHRoZSBIaXN0b3J5IG9mIENoZW1pc3RyeQ..-8tw}

The history of chemistry is an interesting and challenging one. As we
have already seen, very early chemists often were motivated mainly by
the achievement of a specific goal or product. The manufacturing of
perfume or soaps did not require a high level of theory, just a good
recipe and careful attention to detail. Since there was no standard way
of naming materials (and no periodic table that everyone could agree
on), it was often difficult to figure out exactly what a particular
individual was using. Nevertheless, the science of chemistry gradually
developed over the centuries.

Major progress was made in putting chemistry on a solid foundation when
Robert Boyle (1637-1691) began his research in chemistry. He developed
basic ideas that allowed the behavior of gases to be described
mathematically. Boyle also helped formulate the idea that small
particles could combine to form molecules, which was expanded by John
Dalton into an atomic theory a number of years later.

The field of chemistry began to develop rapidly in the 1700s, mainly
through the discovery and isolation of specific materials. Joseph
Priestley (1733-1804) isolated and characterized several gases,
including oxygen, carbon monoxide, and nitrous oxide. It was later
discovered that nitrous oxide (“laughing gas”) worked as a general
anesthetic, and it was first used for that purpose in 1844 during a
tooth extraction. Other gases discovered during that time included
chlorine, by C.W. Scheele (1742-1786), and nitrogen, by Antoine
Lavoisier (1743-1794). Lavoisier is considered by many scholars to be
the “father of chemistry.”

Chemistry in the 1800s continued the discovery of new compounds, but a
more theoretical foundation also began to develop. John Dalton
(1766-1844) put forth his atomic theory in 1807. These ideas allowed
scientists to think about chemistry in a much more systematic way. It
was also during this time that Avogadro (1776-1856) laid the groundwork
for a more quantitative approach to chemistry by calculating the number
of particles present in a given amount of a gas. Greater effort was put
forth in studying chemical reactions and seeing what new materials could
be produced. Following the invention of the battery by Alessandro Volta
(1745-1827), the field of electrochemistry was developed through major
contributions by Humphry Davy (1778-1829) and Michael Faraday
(1791-1867). Other areas of the discipline, including both theoretical
ideas and their practical applications, also progressed rapidly.

It would take a very large book to cover every development in the
history of chemistry, even if we started only at the beginning of the
twentieth century. The history of specific areas will be explored as
certain topics are introduced in later chapters. One major area of
expansion was in the study of the chemistry of living processes.
Research on photosynthesis in plants, the discovery and characterization
of enzymes as biochemical catalysts, the elucidation of the structures
of biomolecules such as insulin and DNA, and numerous other scientific
efforts gave rise to an explosion of information in the field of
biochemistry.

The practical aspects of chemistry are numerous as well. The work of
Volta, Davy, and Faraday eventually led to the development of batteries
that provided a source of electricity to power a number of devices.
Charles Goodyear (1800-1860) discovered the process of vulcanization,
which produced a stable rubber product that is used in the tires of all
modern vehicles. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) pioneered the use of heat
sterilization to eliminate unwanted microorganisms in wine and milk.
Alfred Nobel (1833-1896) invented dynamite. After his death, the fortune
he made from this product was used to fund the Nobel Prizes in science
and the humanities. J.W Hyatt (1837-1920) developed the first plastic
and Leo Baekeland (1863-1944) developed the first synthetic resin, which
are widely used for inexpensive and sturdy dinnerware.

## Examples of Modern Chemistry {#1.html#x-ck12-RXhhbXBsZXMgb2YgTW9kZXJuIENoZW1pc3RyeQ..-xjh}

From the time we get up in the morning until the time we go to bed at
night, chemistry touches our lives in many ways. What we eat, what we
wear, how we get around, those cool electronic gadgets we can’t live
without – chemistry has contributed in some way to the making of each of
these things. Let’s take a look at several areas where chemistry has an
impact on how we live.

### Clothing {#1.html#x-ck12-Q2xvdGhpbmc.-qms}

Many of the fibers that compose the materials for our clothes are
naturally occurring. Silk and cotton are examples of natural fibers.
Silk is produced by the silkworm, and cotton is grown as a plant.
However, several chemical processes are used to treat silk thread so
that it is shrink-resistant and will repel water. Chemical dyes are
frequently used to color various fabrics. Cleaning requires special
soaps or chemicals used to dry-clean materials. Cotton will grow better
if the boll weevil (an insect that kills the plant) is eliminated with
the use of specific insecticides. Ironing of cotton is made easier by
the use of chemicals that produce a permanent press in the material.

Other fabrics are human-made, such as nylon, orlon, polyester, and a
number of other polymers. Many of these materials are made from
hydrocarbons found in petroleum products. Synthetic polymers are also
used in shoes, raingear, and camping items. The synthetic fabrics tend
to be lighter than the natural ones and can be treated to make them
water-resistant and more durable.

Much protective apparel has its roots in chemical processes. Kevlar ^TM^
is a tough polymer that is used for helmets and body armor in combat
situations. First used to replace steel in racing tires, Kevlar ^TM^ is
now found in bicycle tires, sails, and even rope.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-NzRmZDk4ZWU3ZjM1ZmZjOTY3Nzk1M2QwMTc4ZTJlOGI.-fsj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of Sgt. Ethan E. Rocke, United States Marine Corps" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ModularTacticalVest.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130352782.jpeg)

**Figure 1.5**

U.S. Marine Corps body armor.

</div>

### Transportation {#1.html#x-ck12-VHJhbnNwb3J0YXRpb24.-jbc}

Car bodies were at one time made primarily of sheet metal, which could
be pounded out fairly easily in case of a collision. Today, most bodies
are plastic and need to be replaced when damaged. Plastic parts are
easier to manufacture and are lighter in weight than metal ones. Many of
the engine components are made of special metals to increase the
lifetime of the engine and to make it more efficient.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-NDBhODk1NGE1MWE1MmNhN2M2ZTQxMGVkODlmOTMyMTU.-zsk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Flickr:dave_7" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/daveseven/7601192842/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130576979.jpeg)

**Figure 1.6**

A modern car engine.

</div>

Gasoline and oils are complex chemical mixtures designed to burn in a
way that will efficiently produce energy while emitting a minimal amount
of air pollution. The refining of gasoline has improved engine
performance but is much more complicated than simply using the crude
products extracted from oil wells, as was common in the late 1800s. Most
gasoline contained lead at one time, because this additive helped the
engine run more smoothly. However, this caused lead contamination in the
environment, so new “unleaded” formulations were created that could be
burned smoothly without the addition of poisonous heavy metals. Oils for
lubrication have special additives that reduce engine wear. Some special
fuel blends have also been created to generate more power in race car
engines.

### Farming and Gardening {#1.html#x-ck12-RmFybWluZyBhbmQgR2FyZGVuaW5n-o5p}

Three of the most important requirements for crop growth are water,
nutrient-rich soil, and protection from predators such as insects.
Chemistry has made major contributions in all three of these areas.
Water purification uses chemical and physical techniques to remove salt
and harmful contaminants that could pollute the soil. Through chemical
analysis of soil, farmers can see what nutrients the soil is lacking so
these nutrients can be added. In the spring, grocery stores, hardware
stores, and gardening centers have high stacks of bags containing
fertilizers and weed killers that farmers can then use to enrich the
soil and keep unwanted plants from using up the limited water and
nutrients in the soil. These same stores also provide a number of
chemical sprays or solid treatments to ward off insects that might
otherwise snack on the plants.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-ZTMzMDIwNmY1Y2IwYjk3OTViZGVhYTQ1OTE2ODM2OTg.-bch"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of the United States Department of Agriculture" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wheat_harvest.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130705662.jpeg)

**Figure 1.7**

A wheat harvest in the Palouse region of Idaho.

</div>

### Health Care {#1.html#x-ck12-SGVhbHRoIENhcmU.-wpy}

Major contributions to health care have been made by chemistry. The
development of new drugs involves chemical analysis and the synthesis of
new compounds. Practically all of the drugs that you might see
advertised on television were designed and created by chemists. Clinical
laboratory tests for things like high cholesterol or diabetes use a wide
variety of analytical chemical techniques and instruments. Chemistry
also contributes to the preparation and use of surgical materials such
as stitches, artificial skin, and sterile materials.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-MmVlYTI2Y2JjNmVjNDAwNTEwM2Y1MzRmMGVkZGVjMTE.-iyu"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of Mass Communication Specialist 3rd Class Matthew Jackson" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orif_surgery.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130871505.jpeg)

**Figure 1.8**

A surgical relief mission.

</div>

Laboratory tests that at one time were only available in hospitals can
now be found in your local drug store because of developments in
chemistry. For example, you can test your blood glucose using a simple
portable device that runs a chemical test on a blood sample ( **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV8xMV9ibG9vZF9nbHVjb3NlX3Rlc3Rpbmc.) ).
This allows a diabetic patient to monitor their blood glucose more
easily throughout the day, and regulate how much insulin to administer.
Chemistry is also used to produce the insulin drug and disposable
syringe that administers the drug.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-MmQzMzFiM2ZkMDc1NjI2MmMwZTYyMzYyMTUxYjNiNjI.-6wu"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Biswarup Ganguly" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Blood_Glucose_Testing_-_Kolkata_2011-07-25_3975.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235130994015.jpeg)

**Figure 1.9**

A device for testing blood glucose levels at home.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-na4}

-   Chemistry has a long and interesting history.
-   All societies have used some facets of chemistry in the past, but it
    was only recently developed into a systematic field of science.
-   Although the alchemists never did achieve their goal of making gold
    from lead, they did give us some useful chemical tools. \*Modern
    chemistry contributes in many areas of our lives, making them
    easier, safer, and healthier.

## Lesson Review Questions {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-yew}

1.  How can we learn about chemistry knowledge in ancient societies? How
    do we get chemistry knowledge today?
2.  Why was the work of the alchemists important?
3.  Read the label on a prepared food product (for example: bread,
    cereal, dessert). List all the ingredients in the product. Look up
    each ingredient on the Internet and write down what that material is
    doing in the food product.
4.  Select your favorite hobby or activity. List all the items you use
    in that activity or hobby. For each item, find out how chemistry has
    contributed to the creation or better operation of that item.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#1.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-lnt}

-   History of perfumes:
    [http://www.perfumes.com/eng/history.htm](history.htm)
-   Traditional herbal medicines:
    [http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol82/mono82-6A.pdf](mono82-6A.pdf)
-   The origin and chemistry of petroleum:
    [http://www.dpra.com/index.cfm/m/158](158)
-   National Institutes of Health web site dealing with chemistry and
    health: [http://publications.nigms.nih.gov/chemhealth/]()

## Points to Consider {#1.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-jz3}

How did people in ancient times know what to use for perfumes, soaps,
metal refining, medicines, and other applications of chemistry?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686080] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686081] -->

# The Scientific Method {#1.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFNjaWVudGlmaWMgTWV0aG9k}

## Lesson Objectives {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-cnh}

-   Describe the approaches used by the ancient Greek philosophers to
    understand the world around them.
-   Define inductive and deductive reasoning.
-   Name key individuals and groups who contributed to the science
    of chemistry.
-   Describe the scientific method.
-   Describe the rise and fall of the phlogiston theory.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-n4j}

-   **inductive reasoning** : Involves getting a collection of specific
    examples and drawing a general conclusion from them.
-   **deductive reasoning** : Takes a general principle and then draws a
    specific conclusion from the general concept.
-   **scientific method** : A process consisting of making observations,
    developing a hypothesis, and testing that hypothesis.
-   **phlogiston** : The substance that is lost from a material when it
    is burned.

## Check Your Understanding {#1.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-mtg}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#1.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._1-xah}

-   How did ancient civilizations know what chemical processes to use?

## How Do We Know What We Know? {#1.html#x-ck12-SG93IERvIFdlIEtub3cgV2hhdCBXZSBLbm93Pw.._1-i5x}

### Earth, Air, Fire, and Water {#1.html#x-ck12-RWFydGgsIEFpciwgRmlyZSwgYW5kIFdhdGVy_1-tzw}

Humans have always wondered about the world around them. One of the
questions of interest was (and still is) what is this world made of?
Among other definitions, chemistry has often been defined as the study
of matter. What matter consists of has been a source of debate over the
centuries. One of the key arenas for this debate in the Western world
was Greek philosophy.

Philosophy literally means “love of wisdom.” The Greek philosophers held
a great deal of influence in society's general knowledge and belies from
about the seventh century to the first century B.C. As the Roman Empire
became more powerful, Greek ideas were gradually supplanted by Roman
ones. However, many of the ideas carried over into medieval Europe where
they were reexamined along with the rise of modern scientific thought.

In ancient Greece, the basic approach to answering questions about the
world was through discussion and debate. There was very little gathering
of information, and it was believed that the best way to answer
fundamental questions was through reasoning and talking. As a result,
several ideas about matter were put forth, but these ideas could not
really be proven or disproven. For example, Thales of Miletus (\~625-545
B.C.) believed that water was the fundamental unit of matter, whereas
Anaximenes (\~585-525 B.C.) felt that air was the basic unit. Empedocles
(\~490-430 B.C.) argued for the idea that matter was composed of earth,
air, fire, and water. Each of these men had reasons they could offer to
support their theories, but there was no way to prove who was right.

The first major philosopher to gather data through observation was
Aristotle (384-322 B.C., shown in **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV8xMl9hcmlzdG90bGU.) ). He recorded many
observations about the weather, the life and behaviors of plants and
animals, physical motions, and a number of other topics. Aristotle could
potentially be considered the first “real” scientist, because he made
systematic observations of nature before trying to understand what he
was seeing.

Although Aristotle contributed greatly to Greek knowledge, not all of
his observations led to correct theories. Leucippus (\~480-420 B.C.) and
his student Democritus (\~460-370 B.C.) proposed some theories about
matter that Aristotle later opposed. Since Aristotle's influence was so
great, others chose to reject these theories in favor of Aristotle's
ideas. However, it turned out that Aristotle was wrong and Leucippus and
Democritus were right, but at the time there was no method for proving
or disproving these opposing theories. It took almost 2000 years for
people to reconsider this issue since Aristotle was held in such high
regard by scholars.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-NWY4ZDYxNzdkNGJkY2M3YWI1ZDJjNjFjNDk2YWM1YzI.-u8h"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Photographer: User:Jastrow/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aristotle_Altemps_Detail.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235131201368.jpeg)

**Figure 1.10**

Aristotle

</div>

### Inductive and Deductive Reasoning {#1.html#x-ck12-SW5kdWN0aXZlIGFuZCBEZWR1Y3RpdmUgUmVhc29uaW5n_1-nkn}

Two approaches to logical thinking developed over the centuries. These
two methods are **inductive reasoning** and **deductive reasoning** .
Inductive reasoning involves making specific observations, and then
drawing a general conclusion. Deductive reasoning begins with a general
principle and a prediction based on this principle; the prediction is
then tested, and a specific conclusion can then be drawn.

The first step in the process of inductive reasoning is making specific
observations. In the periodic table of elements, which we will discuss
later, there is a group of metals with similar properties called the
alkali metals. The alkali metals include elements such as sodium and
potassium. If I put sodium or potassium in water, I will observe a very
violent reaction every time. I draw a general conclusion from these
observations: all alkali metals will react violently with water.

In deductive reasoning, I start with a general principle. For example,
say I know that acids turn a special material called blue litmus paper
red. I have a bottle of vinegar, which I believe is an acid, so I expect
the litmus paper to turn red when I immerse it in the vinegar. When I
dip the litmus paper in the vinegar, it does turn red, so I conclude
that vinegar is in fact an acid. You can see that in order for deductive
reasoning to lead to correct conclusions, the general principle you
begin with must be true. I can only conclude that vinegar is an acid
based on the accuracy of the general principle that acids turn blue
litmus paper red.

Inductive and deductive reasoning can be thought of as opposites. For
inductive reasoning, we start with specific observations and draw a
general conclusion. For deductive reasoning, we start with a general
principle and use this principle to draw a specific conclusion.

### The Idea of the Experiment {#1.html#x-ck12-VGhlIElkZWEgb2YgdGhlIEV4cGVyaW1lbnQ._1-vxj}

Inductive reasoning is at the heart of what we call the **scientific
method** . In European culture, this approach was developed mainly by
Francis Bacon (1561-1626), a British scholar. He advocated the use of
inductive reasoning in every area of life, not just science. The
scientific method as developed by Bacon and others involved several
steps:

1.  Ask a question – identify the problem to be considered.
2.  Make observations – gather data that pertains to the question.
3.  Propose an explanation (a hypothesis) for the observations.
4.  Design and carry out ways to test the hypothesis.

Note that this should not be considered a “cookbook” for scientific
research. Scientists do not sit down with their daily “to do” list and
write down these steps. The steps may not necessarily be followed in
order, and testing a given explanation often leads to new questions and
observations that can result in changes to the original hypothesis.
However, this method does provide a general outline of how scientific
research is usually done.

During the early days of the scientific enterprise (up to the nineteenth
century), scientists generally worked as individuals. They may have had
an assistant to help with preparing materials, but their work was
usually solitary. Their results might be disseminated in a letter to
friends or at a scientific society meeting. Today the practice of
science is very different. Research is carried out by teams of people,
sometimes at a number of different locations. The details of methods and
the results of the experiments are published in scientific journals and
books, as well as being presented at local, national, or international
meetings. Electronic publication on the Internet speeds up the process
of sharing information with others.

Before conclusions can be considered reliable, experiments and results
must be replicated in other labs. In order for other scientists to know
that the information is correct, the experiments need to be done in
other labs to obtain the same results. Researchers in other labs may get
ideas for new experiments that could confirm the original hypothesis. On
the other hand, they may see flaws in the original thinking and
experiments that would suggest the hypothesis was false. The modern
scientific approach of carefully recording experimental procedures and
data allows results to be tested and replicated to that everyone can
have confidence in the final results.

A good experiment must be carefully designed to test the hypothesis.
Let's think back to our example of inductive reasoning in observing
reactions with alkali metals and water. We believe that all alkali
metals produce violent reactions with water. To test this hypothesis, we
must design an experiment in which we can observe the reactions of each
alkali metal with water. We will test each alkali metal: lithium,
sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium. In order for this
experiment to produce consistent results, we should use the same amount
of water and same size sample of these metals each time a test is
formed. Based on our hypothesis, we expect a violent reaction to occur
when any one of these metals is added to water. If a sample of lithium
is added to our water and we observe a small explosion, our hypothesis
is strengthened. If lithium is added to our water and nothing happens,
our hypothesis must not be true. We can either modify our hypothesis to
include this new data, or replace our hypothesis with a new one.

When a hypothesis is confirmed repeatedly, it eventually becomes a
theory. A theory is a general principle that is offered to explain a
natural phenomenon. A theory offers a description of *why* something
happens. Although theories, like hypotheses, can be disproved, it is
more likely for a theory to be modified. However, while a hypotheses is
a suggested explanation of a phenomena, a theory is a proved explanation
based off of many hypotheses and much experimentation. Over time,
theories evolve with new research and data, but are rarely discarded
completely. A law, on the other hand, is a statement that is always
true, but does not include an explanation as to why. The law of gravity
says a rock will fall when dropped, but it does not explain why
(gravitational theory is very complex and incomplete at present). The
kinetic-molecular theory of gases, on the other hand, tells us what
happens when a gas is heated in a closed container (the pressure
increases), but also explains why (the motions of the gas molecules are
increased due to the change in temperature). Theories do not get
“promoted” to laws, because laws do not answer the “why” question.

### Phlogiston - The Rise and Fall of a Theory {#1.html#x-ck12-UGhsb2dpc3RvbiAtIFRoZSBSaXNlIGFuZCBGYWxsIG9mIGEgVGhlb3J5_1-qyz}

Early chemists spent a lot of time heating things and setting them on
fire (on purpose, unlike some modern-day chemistry students). They
observed that flammable materials tended to weigh less after being
burned. As more materials were studied, this observation was found to be
very consistent. A seemingly reasonable explanation for this phenomenon
was that some substance was lost from the material when it was burned.
This substance was named **phlogiston** from the Greek word φλογιστόν
(transliterated as phlogistón), which means “burning up.” The phlogiston
theory was first put forth in 1667 by the German physician and alchemist
Johann Joachim Becher (1635–1682, shown in **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMV8xMl9KamJlY2hlcg..) ).

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-MmU0Yjc3YWMyMTU5ZGY3ZWJhMmI1Nzg1ZWIwNWI2OTM.-gso"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Jjbecher.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235131320562.jpeg)

**Figure 1.11**

Johann Becher

</div>

Becher had taken the four ancient Greek elements (earth, air, fire, and
water) and discarded fire and air. He expanded the “earth” category to
three groups, one of which was involved in burning. In 1703, George
Stahl, a German professor of medicine and chemistry, renamed this
particular fraction of Becher’s earth as phlogiston.

What was the evidence that led to the development of this theory? One
obvious experiment involved the burning of wood. The ashes remaining
after the fire weighed considerably less than that original wood sample.
Therefore, it seemed that phlogiston had been released during the
burning process, leaving the “dephlogisticated” ashes behind.

If wood or a candle was burned in a closed container, the fire would
soon be extinguished. This was taken by supporters of the theory as
evidence that air could only absorb so much phlogiston. Later, carbon
dioxide gas was discovered and studied. An experiment was performed in
1772 that exhausted all the air in a container. Further burning of a
candle and of phosphorus were then carried out in the container. After
removing the carbon dioxide with an absorbent, a gas was found that did
not support life or combustion. This gas (which we now know as nitrogen
and which comprises about 78% of the atmosphere) was believed to be
phlogiston.

So far, so good. We have observations – things lose weight when they
burn. We have an explanation – the original material loses phlogiston
when it burns. What we don’t know is what phlogiston is or how much of
it is in a given material. But are there other experiments that lead us
in a different direction?

Other scientists started to ask questions and run experiments. They
noticed some results that seemed to contradict what would be expected if
the phlogiston theory was correct. If magnesium is heated, the product
(a solid) weighs more than the original magnesium metal. The explanation
offered was that phlogiston had negative weight in this case. Can the
same material have both a positive weight and a negative weight? When
mercuric oxide was heated in the absence of any charcoal, it returned to
its pure metal form. The phlogiston theory would require that charcoal
(thought to be essentially pure phlogiston) be present to provide the
phlogiston for restoring the metal.

The French scientist Antoine Lavoisier ( **Figure**
[below](#1.html#x-ck12-MTQxNjg2NTMxMzQ5OA..) ) carried out studies on
oxygen (which had originally been discovered by Joseph Priestley, an
ardent supporter of the phlogiston theory). Lavoisier found that when
mercury was heated, it would become mercuric oxide and gain weight. When
the mercuric oxide was heated, it returned to mercury and released a gas
he identified as oxygen. He also carried out a number of experiments
that conclusively demonstrated the essential role of oxygen in
combustion processes.

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-Y2UxNWFmM2EwOTNkMTU1NmE4NGEyYTk0OWM1ZjI1YmY.-xjh"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jacques-Louis David" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:David_-_Portrait_of_Monsieur_Lavoisier_and_His_Wife.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235131442350.jpeg)

**Figure 1.12**

Antoine Lavoisier and his wife Marie-Anne Pierrette Paulze, who was also
a chemist and made contributions to the work of her husband.

</div>

<div id="1.html#x-ck12-YjYyYjU3YjNiYWZmMTI1NDAzZGNlNWEyNDE0N2FiOTY.-f3c"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Marie-Anne Pierrette Paulze" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lavoisier_decomposition_air.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_1_files/20151009235131574184.png)

**Figure 1.13**

The device used by Lavoisier to study the decomposition of mercuric
oxide.

</div>

Eventually the phlogiston theory was replaced by the oxygen-based
combustion ideas developed by Lavoisier and others. Today the theory is
studied as an example of how to approach a scientific question and how
one theory can be supplanted by another theory that more closely fits
the data. It should also be noted that the phlogiston idea took time to
develop, it took time to become accepted, and it took time for
researchers to discard it in favor of a better theory.

## Lesson Summary {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-yxi}

-   The early Greek philosophers spent a great deal of time talking
    about nature, but they did little or no actual exploration
    or investigation.
-   Inductive reasoning means developing a general conclusion from a
    collection of observations.
-   Deductive reasoning means making a specific statement based on a
    general principle.
-   Scientific method is a process consisting of making observations,
    developing a hypothesis, and testing that hypothesis.
-   Phlogiston theory is the disproven idea that materials lost
    phlogiston when they burned.

## Lesson Review Questions {#1.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-qav}

1.  What was a major shortcoming of the approach taken by Greek
    philosophers to understanding the material world?
2.  How did Aristotle improve this approach?
3.  Define “inductive reasoning” and give an example.
4.  Define “deductive reasoning” and give an example.
5.  What is the difference between a hypothesis and a theory?
6.  What is the difference between a theory and a law?
7.  What was the major evidence that supported the phlogiston theory?
8.  What was the major evidence that contradicted the phlogiston theory?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#1.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-hid}

-   Overview of the scientific method:
    [http://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-projects/project\_scientific\_method.shtml](project_scientific_method.shtml)
-   Research using the scientific method:
    [http://www.teachersdomain.org/asset/drey07\_int\_scprocess/]()
-   Lavoisier video:
    [http://www.schooltube.com/video/5a2cb561ceabe931f2b5/Antoine-Lavoisier-the-man](Antoine-Lavoisier-the-man)
-   Information about Lavoisier and phlogiston theory:
    [http://cti.itc.virginia.edu/\~meg3c/classes/tcc313/200Rprojs/lavoisier2/home.html](home.html)

## Points to Consider {#1.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-uuf}

Chemistry is the study of matter and the changes that matter can
undergo.

-   What is matter?
-   Where do you encounter matter in your everyday life?
-   What are the states of matter?
-   Can matter be changed?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686081] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#1.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-njt}

1.  Jon Bodsworth.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Egyptian\_glass\_jar.jpg](File:Egyptian_glass_jar.jpg) .
    The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any
    purpose including unrestricted redistribution, commercial use, and
    modification
2.  Pedanius Dioscorides.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Arabic\_herbal\_medicine\_guidebook.jpg](File:Arabic_herbal_medicine_guidebook.jpg) .
    Public Domain
3.  Joseph Leopold Ratinckx.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Joseph\_Leopold\_Ratinckx\_Der\_Alchemist.jpg](File:Joseph_Leopold_Ratinckx_Der_Alchemist.jpg) .
    Public Domain
4.  Kenelm Digby.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alchemy-Digby-RareSecrets.png](File:Alchemy-Digby-RareSecrets.png) .
    Public Domain
5.  Courtesy of Sgt. Ethan E. Rocke, United States Marine Corps.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ModularTacticalVest.jpg](File:ModularTacticalVest.jpg) .
    Public Domain
6.  Flickr:dave\_7.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/daveseven/7601192842/]() . CC BY 2.0
7.  Courtesy of the United States Department of Agriculture.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wheat\_harvest.jpg](File:Wheat_harvest.jpg) .
    Public Domain
8.  Courtesy of Mass Communication Specialist 3rd Class Matthew Jackson.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orif\_surgery.jpg](File:Orif_surgery.jpg) .
    Public Domain
9.  Biswarup Ganguly.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Blood\_Glucose\_Testing\_-\_Kolkata\_2011-07-25\_3975.JPG](File:Blood_Glucose_Testing_-_Kolkata_2011-07-25_3975.JPG) .
    CC BY 3.0
10. Photographer: User:Jastrow/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Aristotle\_Altemps\_Detail.jpg](File:Aristotle_Altemps_Detail.jpg) .
    Public Domain
11. .
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Jjbecher.jpg](File:Jjbecher.jpg) .
    Public Domain
12. Jacques-Louis David.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:David\_-\_Portrait\_of\_Monsieur\_Lavoisier\_and\_His\_Wife.jpg](File:David_-_Portrait_of_Monsieur_Lavoisier_and_His_Wife.jpg) .
    Public Domain
13. Marie-Anne Pierrette Paulze.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lavoisier\_decomposition\_air.png](File:Lavoisier_decomposition_air.png) .
    Public Domain

<span id="2.html"></span>

# Matter and Change {#2.html#x-ck12-TWF0dGVyIGFuZCBDaGFuZ2U.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_2_files/20151009235133765563.jpeg)
</span>

Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space. Matter is
everywhere. The air we breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat, and
the ground we walk on are all comprised of matter. Matter can take on a
variety of different forms which all have a variety of different
properties. In this chapter, we will introduce the characteristics of
matter and study how these characteristics vary in different types of
matter.

^Image\\ copyright\\ Africa\\ Studio,\\ 2014.\\ www.shutterstock.com.\\ Used\\ under\\ license\\ from\\ Shutterstock.com.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686083] -->

# Properties of Matter {#2.html#x-ck12-UHJvcGVydGllcyBvZiBNYXR0ZXI.}

## Lesson Objectives {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-zhu}

-   Classify properties of materials as extensive, intensive, chemical,
    or physical. Give examples of each.
-   Describe the concepts of intensive and extensive properties and be
    able to describe these properties in a given material.
-   Describe the concepts of physical properties and chemical properties
    and be able to describe these properties for a given material.
-   Explain the concept of density as it relates to other physical
    properties of matter.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-ycw}

-   **chemical properties** : Properties that describe matter's
    reactions with other substances.
-   **physical properties** : Properties of matter that can be observed
    without changing the matter's composition.
-   **intensive properties** : Physical properties that are independent
    on the amount of a substance present.
-   **extensive properties** : Physical properties that depend on the
    amount of a substance present.

## Check Your Understanding {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-mqf}

-   What are some ways that you can distinguish different substances
    from each other?
    -   For example, what is different between sand and sugar?

## Introduction {#2.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-fmf}

All substances have special properties by which they can be identified.
For instance, substances have unique colors, densities, and boiling
points. They also behave in unique ways with other substances. For
example, they may react with air, water, or acids. In chemistry, we
study these properties and use them to identify and categorize matter.

## Chemical Properties {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgUHJvcGVydGllcw..-yy4}

All types of matter exhibit **chemical properties** . Chemical
properties are the properties that describe matter’s reactions with
other substances. We can determine these chemical properties by seeing
what happens to a substance when it is placed in the presence of the
following:

-   air
-   water
-   an acid
-   a base
-   other chemicals

Chemical properties indicate how the composition of a substance will
change when exposed to various other substances. You can observe many
chemical properties in the objects around you. For example, the metal
frame of a bicycle will become rusty over time. The process of the frame
becoming rusty can be described by a chemical property of iron, one of
the metals in the frame. The iron will react with the oxygen in the air
to form iron oxide, or rust.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-MTQyOTI1YzdlODhhMDM4NWIwOWY4MWI2MjhhOTBkYmM.-4bj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(A) Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; (B) Jordan McCullough; (C) Jo Naylor" -->
<!-- @@url="(A) http://images-of-elements.com/iron.php; (B) http://www.flickr.com/photos/ambientideas/3297063530/; (C) http://www.flickr.com/photos/pandora_6666/3454172058/" -->
<!-- @@license="(A) CC BY 3.0; (B) CC BY 2.0; (C) CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235133886882.jpeg)

**Figure 2.1**

\(A) Elemental iron. (B) Oxidized iron plate. (C) Iron “burning.”

</div>

In the **Figure** [above](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMl8yLUlyb25z) we can
observe the difference in color between pure iron, which is a lustrous
dark gray color, and rusted iron, which is a cinnamon colored. We can
also observe the reaction that takes place when iron is heated by a
flame, in which the hot air to reacts more rapidly with the pure iron.
The changes that iron undergoes when exposed to air show us some of
iron's chemical properties and help us to classify iron as specific type
of matter.

**Example 2.1**

Which of the following would be examples of a chemical property?

1.  Most metals will react with acids.
2.  Water can be a solid, liquid, or a gas.
3.  Water mixes well with ethanol.

*Answer: A is an example of chemical properties. Statement B does not
reflect chemical properties; these are physical characteristics of
water. The process described in answer C would not be a chemical
property because no reaction takes place. There are no changes in the
composition of either the water or the ethanol as a result of the
mixing, and both components can be separated from one another using
physical processes.*

## Physical Properties {#2.html#x-ck12-UGh5c2ljYWwgUHJvcGVydGllcw..-rm6}

Matter also exhibits **physical properties** . Physical properties are
used to observe and describe matter. Physical properties can be observed
or measured without changing the composition of matter. These are
properties such as mass, weight, volume, and density. Density
calculations will be discussed later on in chapter three, but for now
just remember that density is a physical property.

### Intensive Properties {#2.html#x-ck12-SW50ZW5zaXZlIFByb3BlcnRpZXM.-gnc}

Physical properties that do not depend on the amount of substance
present are called **intensive properties** . Intensive properties do
not change with changes of size, shape, or scale. Examples of intensive
properties are as follows in the **Table**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6aW50ZW5zaXZlX3Byb3BlcnRpZXM.) .

  Intensive Properties   Example
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------
  color                  Aluminum metal is gray colored.
  taste                  Lemon juice (citric acid) is sour.
  melting point          Aluminum has melting point of 660°C.
  boiling point          Water has a boiling point of 100°C.
  density                Water has a density of 1 g/mL.
  luster                 Metals are lustrous (shiny).
  hardness               Diamond is the hardest substance known.

### Extensive Properties {#2.html#x-ck12-RXh0ZW5zaXZlIFByb3BlcnRpZXM.-a5q}

Physical properties that do depend on the amount of substance present
are called **extensive properties** . Examples of extensive properties
include:

-   Mass
-   Volume
-   Length

**Example 2.2**

Which of the following is an intensive property of a box of crackers?

1.  Calories per serving.
2.  Total grams.
3.  Total number of crackers.
4.  Total calories.

*Answer: A. Calories per serving. Total grams, total crackers, and total
number of calories are extensive properties. A larger amount of crackers
would have more grams, crackers, and total calories but the same number
of calories per serving.*

**Example 2.3**

Which of the following is an extensive property?

1.  The color of charcoal is black.
2.  Gold is shiny.
3.  The volume of orange juice is 25 mL.

*Answer: C. The volume of orange juice is 25 mL. Charcoal's black color
and gold's luster are intensive properties, and are not dependent on
how* much *charcoal or gold is present. However if you had more or less
orange juice, its volume would not stay the same. So, this is an
extensive property.*

## Lesson Summary {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-57x}

-   Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space.
-   The properties of matter can be classified as either chemical
    or physical.
-   Chemical properties describe the reactions that can occur when
    matter is treated with other substances, such as how a substance
    reacts with air or with an acid.
-   Physical properties, such as mass, volume, density, and color, can
    be observed without changing the identity of the matter.
-   We can further categorize the physical properties of matter as
    either intensive or extensive.
-   Intensive properties do not depend on the amount of the
    substance present. Some examples of intensive properties are color,
    taste, and melting point.
-   Extensive properties vary according to the amount of matter present.
    Examples of extensive properties include mass, volume, and length.

## Lesson Review Questions {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-nsx}

1.  Compare and contrast physical properties and chemical properties.
2.  Which of these is a chemical property?
    1.  Oxygen is a gas at 25°C.
    2.  Helium is very nonreactive.
    3.  Ice melts at 0°C.
    4.  Sodium is a soft, shiny metal.

3.  Indicate whether each of the following is a chemical property or a
    physical property. If it is a physical property, indicate whether it
    is an intensive or extensive property.
    1.  Water boils at 100°C.
    2.  Diamonds are the hardest known substance.
    3.  Salt is capable of dissolving in water.
    4.  Vinegar reacts with baking soda.
    5.  Most metals are lustrous.
    6.  Most metals react with acids.
    7.  A given sample of lead weighs 4.5 g.
    8.  The length of a piece of aluminum foil is 12.2 cm.
    9.  Gold conducts electricity.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#2.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-xwz}

-   Examples of laboratory techniques used for separating mixtures:
    [http://sciencepark.etacude.com/projects/]()

## Points to Consider {#2.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-wc8}

-   How could you categorize types of matter based on differing chemical
    and physical properties?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686083] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686084] -->

# Classification of Matter {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2xhc3NpZmljYXRpb24gb2YgTWF0dGVy}

## Lesson Objectives {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-wey}

-   Distinguish between gases, liquids, and solids. Explain how these
    states differ at the molecular level.
-   Classify samples of matter as pure substances, homogeneous mixtures,
    heterogeneous mixtures, compounds, and elements.
-   Use sketches to show how elements, compounds, and mixtures differ at
    the molecular level.
-   Describe six different techniques for separating mixtures.
-   Relate the names of elements to their international element symbols.
-   Name the major groups and regions on the periodic table and identify
    elements belonging to these groups.
-   Distinguish between metals, nonmetals, and metalloids using the
    periodic table.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-ifg}

-   **pure substances** : Have a constant composition and can only be
    changed by chemical reactions.
-   **elements** : Substances that cannot be decomposed into simpler
    substances by chemical or physical means.
-   **compounds** : Substances that can be broken down into their
    individual elements, but only through chemical processes.
-   **mixtures** : A combination of two or more pure substances.
-   **homogeneous mixtures** : A mixture with uniform
    composition throughout.
-   **heterogeneous mixtures** : A mixture with visibly distinguishable
    components, exist primarily in the solid and liquid states.

## Check Your Understanding {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-koq}

-   Give some examples of chemical properties and physical properties
    of matter.
-   What would be some chemical and physical properties of the following
    substances:
    -   a glass of water
    -   aluminum foil
    -   argon

## Introduction {#2.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-2na}

As we studied in our last lesson, matter can be described by its
physical and chemical properties. We have seen examples of how matter
exhibits specific physical and chemical properties, which can be used to
distinguish one type of matter from another. In this lesson, we are
going to use these properties to categorize the various forms of matter.

## States of Matter {#2.html#x-ck12-U3RhdGVzIG9mIE1hdHRlcg.._1-pgm}

Matter typically exists in one of three states: solid, liquid, or gas.
The state of a given substance is a physical property. Some substances
exist as gases at room temperature (such as oxygen and carbon dioxide),
while others (like water and mercury metal) exist as liquids. Most
metals exist as solids at room temperature. All substances can exist in
any of these three states.

Water is a very common substance that we frequently encounter in all
three states of matter, as seen in **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDItV2F0ZXItc3RhdGVz) . When water is
in the solid state, we call it ice, while water in the gaseous state is
referred to as steam or water vapor. The physical state of matter is a
physical property because the identity of a **pure substance** does not
change when it is melted, frozen, or boiled.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-ZjcyNDE2N2NhNDA1MzQ1YWVjOWIzMjE1M2ViZGU2NTc.-gmj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(A) Rodrigo; (B) Christine und David Schmitt (Flickr:cheesy42); (C) Steven Whateley" -->
<!-- @@url="(A) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lillafured_icedwaterfall_wman.jpg; (B) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nile_river_at_Luxor_2007.jpg; (C) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Steam_Train.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="(A) CC BY 2.5; (B) CC BY 2.0; (C) Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235133990677.png)

**Figure 2.2**

Water is the same substance in any of its three states. (A) A frozen
waterfall in Hungary. (B) The Nile River in Egypt. (C) A steam powered
train in Wales.

</div>

### Solid {#2.html#x-ck12-U29saWQ._1-ewm}

A solid is a form of matter that has a definite shape and volume. The
shape of a solid does not change if it is transferred from one container
to another. The particles of a solid are packed tightly together in
fixed positions, usually in an orderly arrangement. Solids are almost
completely incompressible, meaning that solids cannot be squeezed into a
smaller volume. When a solid is heated or cooled, it expands or
contracts only slightly.

### Liquid {#2.html#x-ck12-TGlxdWlk_1-jfz}

A liquid is a form of matter that has a definite volume, but an
indefinite shape. As water is poured from one container into another, it
adopts the shape of its new container. However, the volume of the water
does not change, because the water molecules are still relatively close
to one another in the liquid state. Unlike a solid, the arrangement of
particles in a liquid is not rigid and orderly. Liquids are also
incompressible.

### Gas {#2.html#x-ck12-R2Fz_1-zw1}

A gas is a form of matter that has neither a definite shape nor a
definite volume. A gas takes up the shape and volume of its container.
This is because the particles of a gas are very far apart from one
another compared to the particles that make up solids and liquids. Gases
are easily compressed because of the large spaces in between gas
particles. Gas particles are often invisible, but they can be detected
in various ways, such as the light emitted when an electric current is
passed through a sample of a gas ( **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDMtU29kaXVtLUxhbXA.) ).

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-YTg3YTc1YWUzOGZhYzdkMzFhZTBlYjY2Y2IxZTdiMDU.-vgj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Proton02/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LPS_Lamp_35W_running.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134137961.jpeg)

**Figure 2.3**

Sodium vapor lamps glow with a distinctive yellow color.

</div>

### Molecular View of Solids, Liquids, and Gases {#2.html#x-ck12-TW9sZWN1bGFyIFZpZXcgb2YgU29saWRzLCBMaXF1aWRzLCBhbmQgR2FzZXM._1-xmr}

We are quite familiar with the properties of solids, liquids, and gases
from our everyday experience. These properties are fundamentally based
on differences in the arrangement of atoms or molecules at the
microscopic level. **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDQtU3RhdGVzLW9mLU1hdHRlcg..) shows
the differences between the ways in which particles appear in each of
these three states. Remember, any substance can be present as a gas,
liquid, or solid when placed under specific conditions.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-YWQwN2Y0ZTEwZmM0MDczNTFmMzI0ZjQ5NmNiZTEzYTg.-4j7"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134252799.png)

**Figure 2.4**

The particles of a gas are very far apart compared to the particles of a
liquid or a solid.

</div>

As **Figure**
[above](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDQtU3RhdGVzLW9mLU1hdHRlcg..) shows,
the distance between particles is much smaller for the solid and liquid
states than for the gas state. In the solid state, particles are fixed
in place, while particles are more free to move in the liquid and gas
states. The particles in the solid and liquid states “stick together,”
but in the gas state, they move freely about the container. In general,
it requires energy to separate individual particles. If we want to make
a solid adopt a liquid form, we can add energy in the form of heat,
increasing the temperature of the substance. Conversely, if we want to
convert a substance from a gas to a liquid or from a liquid to a solid,
we remove energy from the system and decrease the temperature. Pressure
also plays an important role in changes of state, which will be
discussed later on. We will study these difference in greater detail in
the chapter *States of Matter.*

## Pure Substances {#2.html#x-ck12-UHVyZSBTdWJzdGFuY2Vz_1-pjs}

When studying the different states that matter exhibits, we have been
looking at **pure substances** . Pure substances have a constant
composition and can only be changed through chemical reactions. Constant
composition indicates that a sample of a pure substance always contains
the same elements in the same proportions. There are two main types of
pure substances:

-   **elements** : Substances that cannot be decomposed into simpler
    substances by chemical or physical means.
-   **compounds** : Substances that can be broken down into elements
    through chemical means.

**Figure** [below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDctUHVyZQ..) shows pure
substances in the form of elements and compounds.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-YzczMTRlMzBjYWJiNTFmZTg0YjMwZGY0MWIyZDJiOGM.-apu"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Sulfur: Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; Water: Claire Cessford" -->
<!-- @@url="Sulfur: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur_%2816_S%29.jpg; Water: http://www.flickr.com/photos/35137234@N06/4230612281/" -->
<!-- @@license="Sulfur: CC BY 3.0; Water: CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134365905.jpeg)

**Figure 2.5**

Pure substances: ( *left* ) the element sulfur and ( *right* ) the
compound water.

</div>

The image on the left shows elemental sulfur in the solid state. The
image on the right shows water in its liquid form. Sulfur is a pure
element, and water is a compound comprised of the elements hydrogen and
oxygen. Both of these substances have a constant composition, but water
can be broken down into its elements, whereas sulfur cannot be
decomposed into a simpler substance. Water can be broken down into its
elements by passing electricity through a salt solution.

### Periodic Table of Elements {#2.html#x-ck12-UGVyaW9kaWMgVGFibGUgb2YgRWxlbWVudHM._1-tae}

Chemists have classified and organized all of the known elements into
what is called the periodic table. All known substances are made of some
combination of these elements. The periodic table is a tool that we use
to help identify and describe the composition of a given substance. All
pure substances which cannot be broken down further, which we have
called elements, are displayed in the periodic table. **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDgtUGVyaW9kaWMtVGFibGU.) shows our
modern periodic table. We will study the periodic table in more detail
in the chapter *The Periodic Table* .

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-Y2FkYmQyYzJlMmNjNjY2YTRiZWIwN2JmMDE5NDM5OTI.-g1m"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic_table.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134465514.png)

**Figure 2.6**

The modern periodic table.

</div>

## Mixtures {#2.html#x-ck12-TWl4dHVyZXM._1-dsf}

When two or more pure substances are combined together, a **mixture** is
formed. Unlike pure substances, mixtures have a variable composition.
Variable composition indicates that the relative proportions of the
mixtures components may vary, and they can be separated by physical
methods. There are two main types of mixtures.

### Homogeneous Mixtures {#2.html#x-ck12-SG9tb2dlbmVvdXMgTWl4dHVyZXM._1-xzw}

A **homogeneous mixture** is one in which the composition is uniform
throughout the mixture. A glass of salt water is a homogeneous mixture
because the dissolved salt is evenly distributed throughout the entire
sample. It is often easy to confuse a homogeneous mixture with a pure
substance because they are both uniform, and it can be difficult to tell
which type you have by the naked eye. The difference is that the
composition of the pure substance is always the same, while the
composition of a homogeneous mixture can vary. For example, you may
dissolve a small amount or a large amount of salt into a given sample of
water. Although the ratio of salt to water will differ, the mixtures
will both be homogeneous. However, pure water will always have the same
ratio of elements that make it a pure substance (two hydrogen atoms per
oxygen atom).

Wine, air, and gunpowder are other examples of common homogeneous
mixtures ( **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDktSG9tb2dlbm91cw..) ). Their exact
compositions can vary, making them mixtures rather than pure substances.
Wine is a liquid mixture of water, ethanol, and a variety of other
dissolved substances. Air is a mixture of nitrogen gas (78%), oxygen gas
(21%), and small amounts of various other gases. Gunpowder is a solid
mixture comprised of potassium nitrate (75%), charcoal (15%) and sulfur
(10%).

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-MDJiYzBiMGNiMWYzNTk1NzMzNWRjMTNmZmRjYjQwZTk.-9pk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Wine: George Hodan; Gunpowder: Oliver H." -->
<!-- @@url="Wine: http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/view-image.php?image=35183&#38;picture=glass-of-red-wine; Gunpowder: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spk-RZ.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134602741.jpeg)

**Figure 2.7**

Examples of homogenous mixtures: wine and gunpowder.

</div>

In the **Figure**
[above](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDktSG9tb2dlbm91cw..) , we see that
the components of these mixtures cannot be distinguished from one
another. However, the substances comprising these mixtures can be
separated through physical means.

### Heterogeneous Mixtures {#2.html#x-ck12-SGV0ZXJvZ2VuZW91cyBNaXh0dXJlcw.._1-flh}

**Heterogeneous mixtures** have visibly distinguishable parts. These
mixtures will typically exist in the solid or liquid states, but not the
gas state. Gas state heterogeneous mixtures are not possible because gas
particles freely mix and disperse. Heterogeneous mixtures are quite
common. For example, oil-and-vinegar salad dressing is a heterogeneous
mixture that is in the liquid state. Its composition varies and
typically includes olive oil mixed with red vinegar. An example of a
solid heterogeneous mixture is soil. Soil is primarily comprised of
organic and inorganic material, including substances like decaying
plants and animals, minerals, water, and air. The composition of soil
varies greatly from one location to another. **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMTAtSGV0ZXJvZ2Vub3Vz) shows these
mixtures.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-NGNiOWViYmZiOTdhNTA3ZjVjMTU5NTYxMjQxMjg2YWY.-3e7"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Oil/vinegar: Kat (Flickr:tyger_lyllie); Soil: Petr Kratochvil" -->
<!-- @@url="Oil/vinegar: http://www.flickr.com/photos/tyger_lyllie/3350276971/; Soil: http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/view-image.php?image=13200&#38;picture=soil-texture" -->
<!-- @@license="Oil/vinegar: CC BY 2.0; Soil: Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134710033.jpeg)

**Figure 2.8**

Examples of heterogeneous mixtures: ( *left* ) oil and vinegar and (
*right* ) soil.

</div>

The substances that comprise heterogeneous mixtures can also be
separated by physical means. We will discuss separation techniques in
the following lesson.

## Lesson Summary {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-xyo}

-   Matter exhibits specific physical and chemical properties.
-   Matter can exist in one of three states: solid, liquid, or gas.
-   In the solid state, particles are fixed in place relative to
    one another. In the liquid and gas states, individual particles are
    free to move.
-   Under the right pressure conditions, lowering the temperature of a
    substance in the gas state causes the substance to liquefy. The
    opposite effect occurs if temperature is increased.
-   Under the right pressure conditions, lowering the temperature of a
    substance in the liquid state causes the substance to solidify. The
    opposite effect occurs if the temperature is increased.
-   Pure substances have a constant composition and can only be changed
    by chemical reactions. They can be classified as either elements
    or compounds.
-   Elements are substances that cannot be decomposed into simpler
    substances by chemical or physical means. Compounds, however, can be
    broken down further through chemical, but not physical, means.
-   The periodic table is a tool that we use to help identify and
    describe the composition of a given substance. The table is an
    arrangement of elements based on their physical and
    chemical properties.
-   Homogeneous or heterogeneous mixtures are formed when two or more
    pure substances are combined. A homogeneous mixture has a uniform
    distribution throughout the sample, whereas a heterogeneous mixture
    has visibly distinguishable components.

## Lesson Review Questions {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-6oe}

1.  Compare and contrast the three states of matter. Try to describe
    similarities and differences apparent at a microscopic level as well
    as at the observable level between these states of matter.
2.  Which of the following would be an example of a pure substance?
    1.  plastic
    2.  milk
    3.  100% ethanol
    4.  cake flour

3.  Which of the following would be an example of an element?
    1.  water
    2.  orange juice
    3.  steel
    4.  iron

4.  Which of the following would be an example of a compound?
    1.  water
    2.  sulfur
    3.  aluminum
    4.  brass

5.  Compare and contrast a pure substance with a mixture and give
    an example.
6.  Which of the following statements is true?
    1.  The periodic table is a list of various compounds found
        throughout the world.
    2.  The periodic table is randomly organized.
    3.  The periodic table has been the same for 50 years.
    4.  The periodic table is an organized assembly of the various
        elements that have been discovered.

7.  Classify the following as a homogeneous mixture, a heterogeneous
    mixture, or neither.
    1.  powdered sugar
    2.  mayonnaise
    3.  scrambled egg
    4.  air
    5.  soda pop
    6.  concrete
    7.  apple juice
    8.  glass
    9.  steel
    10. copper

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#2.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-dhw}

-   Examples of laboratory techniques used for separating mixtures can
    be found at Science Park:
    [http://sciencepark.etacude.com/projects/]()

## Points to Consider {#2.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-2fq}

-   As we saw, compounds can be broken down into their
    elemental components. How might you go about breaking down a
    compound into its elements?
-   The components that comprise homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures
    can be separated out by physical means. How might you go about
    separating out components of a soil mixture?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686084] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686085] -->

# Changes in Matter {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hhbmdlcyBpbiBNYXR0ZXI.}

## Lesson Objectives {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-cbv}

-   Describe methods for separating mixtures, such as chromatography,
    distillation, fractional distillation, evaporation, and filtration.
-   Given a specific mixture, propose methods by which the mixture’s
    components could be isolated.
-   Identify the chemical properties of a substance.
-   Describe chemical changes and differentiate them from
    physical changes.
-   Use various visual clues to identify whether a chemical reaction is
    taking place.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-2rg}

-   **chemical change** : A change during which the chemical identity of
    a substance is altered. Chemical changes are often accompanied by a
    change in color, temperature, or odor, or the production of a gas
    or precipitate.
-   **physical change** : A change in which the physical form and
    properties of a substance change.
-   **chromatography** : The separation of a mixture by passing it
    through a medium in which the components move at different rates.
-   **distillation** : A purification process in which the components of
    a liquid mixture are vaporized and then condensed and isolated.
-   **evaporation** : A technique used to separate out homogeneous
    mixtures in which one or more solids are dissolved in a liquid.
-   **filtration** : A method used to separate mixtures in which some of
    the particles are large enough in size to be captured with a porous
    material while others are not.
-   **chemical property** : The ability of a substance to undergo a
    specific chemical change.

## Check Your Understanding {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-cdo}

-   Compare and contrast chemical properties and physical properties.
-   Give examples of physical properties and chemical properties.
-   Compare and contrast the following pairs of terms: element and
    compound; pure substance and mixture.

## Introduction {#2.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-jv5}

In the previous lesson, we discussed pure substances and mixtures. We
indicated that the components of a mixture could be separated by
physical means, but the components of a pure substance could not. Pure
substances can only be broken down further through chemical means. In
this lesson, we list several methods for separating mixtures. We will
also be looking at **chemical changes** which alter the chemical
identity of a substance, and how to recognize when a chemical change is
taking place.

## Physical Change {#2.html#x-ck12-UGh5c2ljYWwgQ2hhbmdl_2-rxn}

Any time the physical properties of a substance are changed, we can say
the substance has undergone a **physical change** . All substances
undergo physical changes where there is a change in the form of the
substance but not in its chemical composition. For instance, the
grinding of granular sugar into powdered sugar is a physical change.
Similarly, dissolving sugar in water is a physical change. We can also
use physical changes to separate mixtures into their components. There
are a variety of methods used, and the best procedure depends largely on
the nature of the mixture. Depending on the states of matter involved,
the relative sizes of the mixtures components, and whether the mixture
is homogeneous or heterogeneous will determine the necessary separation
technique.

## Methods for Separating Mixtures {#2.html#x-ck12-TWV0aG9kcyBmb3IgU2VwYXJhdGluZyBNaXh0dXJlcw.._2-trz}

### Chromatography {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hyb21hdG9ncmFwaHk._2-k6o}

**Chromatography** is the separation of a mixture by passing it through
a medium in which the components move at different rates. Mixtures that
are solutions (such as salt water), suspensions (such as sand mixed with
water), or even vapors can be separated in this way. Paper
chromatography is a type of chromatography that can be used for
separating and identifying mixtures in which one or more components are
colored, especially pigments. The following video shows paper
chromatography being used to separate out the dyes present in a variety
of water-soluble inks:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ac9vALSoxbY](watch?v=ac9vALSoxbY)
(0:43).

[![](ck12_2_files/tmpeVpGKu.jpeg)](ac9vALSoxbY%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D56f456265cd4ca637f4f57f71cd17667)

Click on the image above for more content

In this video, we see several different dyes that have been placed on
paper through which water was absorbed. Dyes, such as the ink in colored
markers, are usually a mixture of several different colored compounds.
The dyes in water-soluble inks dissolve easily in water, while permanent
inks dissolve more readily in organic solvents such as ethanol.

### Distillation {#2.html#x-ck12-RGlzdGlsbGF0aW9u_2-xjz}

**Distillation** is an effective method to separate mixtures comprised
of two or more pure liquids. Distillation is a purification process in
which the components of a liquid mixture are vaporized (transformed from
liquid to gas) and then condensed (transformed from gas back to liquid)
and isolated. In a simple distillation, a mixture is gradually heated.
The solution with the lowest boiling point will change into a gas first.
This gas, or vapor, then passes through a cooled tube (a condenser)
where it condenses back into its liquid state. This condensed liquid is
called the distillate. **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMDktRGlzdGlsbGF0aW9u) illustrates
this.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-ZjZmNDc1NTMyNDJmMDEwZDY2NTQ1ZmEzNTAyMDA1ZmE.-lwk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Pearson Scott Foresman" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Distillation_%28PSF%29.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134828219.png)

**Figure 2.9**

In this figure, we see several important pieces of equipment. There is a
heat source and a flask containing the liquid to be distilled. At the
center of the set-up is the condenser. The distillate is collected in a
flask. There are other more complicated assemblies for distillation that
can also be used, especially to separate mixtures which are comprised of
pure liquids with boiling points that are close to one another.

</div>

When a mixture contains several components with similar boiling points,
the one-step distillation may not give a pure substance in the receiving
vessel. Therefore, more elaborate methods are used to completely
separate a mixtures components. Distillation is an especially effective
physical technique in separating out a homogeneous mixture comprised of
two or more pure liquids, such as alcohol and water.

### Evaporation {#2.html#x-ck12-RXZhcG9yYXRpb24._2-w1z}

**Evaporation** is a technique used to separate out homogeneous mixtures
in which one or more solids are dissolved in a liquid. Typically, the
mixture is heated until all of the liquid has vaporized, leaving behind
the dissolved solids ( **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMTAtRXZhcG9yYXRpb24.) ). The vapor
can also be captured and recondensed into a liquid if desired.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-ODJlYjhmY2RjMzU5ZGI4MTI0MDQ1ODYzMGJjOGFiOTc.-mxz"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235134922778.jpeg)

**Figure 2.10**

Evaporation

</div>

This method can only be used to separate volatile liquid components
(those which will evaporate at low temperatures) from nonvolatile solid
components (those which will not evaporate at low temperatures). If
there is more than one liquid or solid component, that portion of the
mixture cannot be isolated purely.

### Filtration {#2.html#x-ck12-RmlsdHJhdGlvbg.._2-w3r}

**Filtration** can be used to separate mixtures in which the some of the
particles are large enough in size to be captured with a porous material
while others are not. Particle sizes can vary considerably. For
instance, stream water is a mixture that contains naturally occurring
biological organisms like bacteria, viruses, and protozoans. Some water
filters can filter out bacteria, the length of which is on the order of
1 micrometer. Other mixtures, like wet soil, contain relatively large
particles that can be filtered out using something like a coffee filter.

## Chemical Change {#2.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgQ2hhbmdl_2-ovr}

Much of the field of chemistry is devoted to the study of chemical
changes. A **chemical change** , also referred to as a chemical
reaction, is one in which the chemical identity of a substance is
altered. We witness chemical changes every day. For example, the burning
of wood or the rusting of iron are chemical changes. The burning of wood
is a process in which cellulose molecules break down into water and
carbon dioxide. The rusting of iron is a process in which elemental iron
combines with oxygen (from air or water) to produce iron oxide (
**Figure** [below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMTEtUnVzdA..) ).

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-YmI2ZjA1YTIwNGRhZTA1OGVlYTJkOTA5ZTZiMDEyZmY.-g8j"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Duff Axsom (Flickr:duff_sf)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/sfbear/472100458/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235135043143.jpeg)

**Figure 2.11**

Rust (iron oxide) forms on an unprotected iron surface.

</div>

As the rust forms on the surface of the iron, it flakes off to expose
more iron, which will continue to rust. Rust is clearly a substance that
is different from iron. Rusting is an example of a chemical change. Some
chemical changes are not as obvious but are still hugely important. For
example, photosynthesis and cellular respiration are chemical changes
that we could not live without. Chemical changes involve the
combination, decomposition, or rearrangement of elements and compounds
to form new substances.

A **chemical property** describes the ability of a substance to undergo
a specific chemical change. A chemical property of iron is that it is
capable of combining with oxygen to form iron oxide, the chemical name
of rust. A more general term for rusting and other similar processes is
corrosion. Other terms that are commonly used in descriptions of
chemical changes are burn, rot, explode, decompose, and ferment.
Chemical properties are very useful as a way of identifying substances.
However, unlike physical properties, chemical properties can only be
observed as the substance is in the process of being changed into a
different substance.

### Recognizing Chemical Changes {#2.html#x-ck12-UmVjb2duaXppbmcgQ2hlbWljYWwgQ2hhbmdlcw.._2-cg4}

How can you tell if a chemical change is taking place? Certain visual
clues indicate that a chemical change is likely (but not necessarily)
occurring, including the following examples:

1.  A change of color occurs.
2.  A gas is produced.
3.  A solid product called a precipitate is produced.
4.  A change of energy is apparent, due to a change in temperature or
    the appearance of light such as a flame.

Mercury(II) oxide is a red solid. When it is heated to a temperature
above 500°C, it easily decomposes into mercury and oxygen gas. The red
color of the reactant, mercury oxide, is gradually replaced by the
silver color of the product, mercury. The color change is one sign that
this reaction is occurring. Watch this decomposition take place at
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_Y1alDuXm6A](watch?v=_Y1alDuXm6A)
(1:12).

[![](ck12_2_files/tmpQAn6qV.jpeg)](_Y1alDuXm6A%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3De68d24a88ae869d28bd8ed7242ab7026)

Click on the image above for more content

When zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid, the reaction bubbles vigorously
as hydrogen gas is produced ( **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMTItWmluYy1BY2lk) ). The production
of a gas is also an indication that a chemical reaction may be
occurring.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-ODgxYTRmZWQ3OTZiNzIyZWRkMzk5M2ZlZjIzYjZiZDc.-dv0"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn_reaction_with_HCl.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235135205620.jpeg)

**Figure 2.12**

Zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce bubbles of hydrogen gas.

</div>

When a colorless solution of lead(II) nitrate is added to a colorless
solution of potassium iodide, a yellow solid called a precipitate is
instantly produced ( **Figure**
[below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItMTMtUHJlY2lwaXRhdGU.) ). A
precipitate is a solid product that forms from a reaction and settles
out of a liquid mixture. The formation of a precipitate may also
indicate the occurrence of a chemical reaction.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-NDk1NTAxZmJlOTI4MzEwYmY1MjMwZWQwYzhmNDNjZjI.-uxa"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Paige Powers (Flickr:paigggeyy)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/paigggeyy/5533819494/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235135318918.jpeg)

**Figure 2.13**

A yellow precipitate of solid lead(II) iodide forms immediately when
solutions of lead(II) nitrate and potassium iodide are mixed.

</div>

All chemical changes involve a transfer of energy. When zinc reacts with
hydrochloric acid, the test tube becomes very warm as energy is released
during the reaction. Some other reactions absorb energy. While energy
changes are a potential sign of a chemical reaction, care must be taken
to ensure that a chemical reaction is indeed taking place. Physical
changes may also involve a transfer of energy. A solid absorbs energy
when it melts, and the condensation of a gas releases energy. The only
way to be certain that a chemical reaction has occurred is to test the
composition of the substances after the change has taken place to see if
they are different from the starting substances.

## Lesson Summary {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-woy}

-   Matter can undergo chemical and physical changes.
-   Mixtures can be separated through physical changes, including
    techniques such as chromatography, distillation, evaporation,
    and filtration. Physical changes do not alter the nature of the
    substance, they simply alter the form.
-   Pure substances, such as compounds, can be separated through
    chemical changes. Chemical changes change the chemical composition
    of a substance and can only occur through a chemical reaction.
-   Four clues to a possible chemical reaction include a color change,
    the production of a gas, the formation of a precipitate, and an
    observable transfer of energy.

## Lesson Review Questions {#2.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-bgr}

1.  Can elements be broken down further into other pure substances?
2.  For each of the following mixtures, describe how you might separate
    out the components using one of the techniques discussed in
    this chapter.
    1.  separating dyes in inks
    2.  separating sand from water
    3.  separating ethanol from water
    4.  separating water from ink
    5.  separating salt from water

3.  A candle is a mixture of substances that, when burned, breaks down
    primarily into carbon dioxide and water. How might you test for the
    presence of water that is produced when a candle is burned?
4.  Carbonated beverages contain carbon dioxide gas that is dissolved
    in solution. Do you think a carbonated beverage is a mixture or a
    pure substance? Explain.
5.  Classify each of the following as a chemical change or a
    physical change.
    1.  Sugar dissolves in water.
    2.  A peach rots.
    3.  Icicles melt in the warm sunlight.
    4.  A baking cake rises in the oven.
    5.  A leaf changes its color in the fall.
    6.  Food coloring is added to a glass of water.

6.  The **Figure**
    [below](#2.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDItTDMtUjYtRGlydHktV2F0ZXItU3VnYXItV2F0ZXI.)
    shows two different mixtures. The mixture on the left is comprised
    of muddy water, while the mixture on the right is a mixture of sugar
    and water. Describe how you might go about separating out the
    components of each of these mixtures.

<div id="2.html#x-ck12-NDE4OWIzOGExZjlhMjhlYzFhYTVmOTFmYWZhMzc0YmY.-6de"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Muddy water: Image copyright Alena Brozova, 2014; Sugar water: Image copyright m.bonotto, 2014" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under licenses from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_2_files/20151009235135439596.jpeg)

**Figure 2.14**

( *left* ) Muddy water. ( *right* ) Sugar water.

</div>

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#2.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-atm}

-   School Science Lessons:
    [http://www.uq.edu.au/\_School\_Science\_Lessons/topic10.html](topic10.html)
-   Examples of laboratory techniques used for separating mixtures at
    Science Park: [http://sciencepark.etacude.com/projects/]()
-   Ophardt, Charles E. 2011. Virtual Chembook. Elmhurst
    College 20032011. Available from:
    [http://www.elmhurst.edu/\~chm/vchembook/index.html](index.html)

## Points to Consider {#2.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-7s1}

-   We have thus far assumed that elements cannot be broken down further
    into constituent parts. Is this completely true?
-   What do you suppose elements are comprised of and how might you be
    able to distinguish or measure the components of an element?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686085] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#2.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-tpf}

1.  \(A) Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; (B) Jordan McCullough; (C)
    Jo Naylor. [(A) http://images-of-elements.com/iron.php; (B)
    http://www.flickr.com/photos/ambientideas/3297063530/; (C)
    http://www.flickr.com/photos/pandora\_6666/3454172058/]() . (A) CC BY
    3.0; (B) CC BY 2.0; (C) CC BY 2.0
2.  \(A) Rodrigo; (B) Christine und David Schmitt (Flickr:cheesy42); (C)
    Steven Whateley. [(A)
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lillafured\_icedwaterfall\_wman.jpg; (B)
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nile\_river\_at\_Luxor\_2007.jpg; (C)
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Steam\_Train.JPG](File:Steam_Train.JPG) .
    (A) CC BY 2.5; (B) CC BY 2.0; (C) Public Domain
3.  User:Proton02/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:LPS\_Lamp\_35W\_running.jpg](File:LPS_Lamp_35W_running.jpg) .
    Public Domain
4.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
5.  Sulfur: Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; Water: Claire Cessford.
    [Sulfur:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur\_%2816\_S%29.jpg;
    Water: http://www.flickr.com/photos/35137234@N06/4230612281/]() .
    Sulfur: CC BY 3.0; Water: CC BY 2.0
6.  User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic\_table.svg](File:Periodic_table.svg) .
    Public Domain
7.  Wine: George Hodan; Gunpowder: Oliver H.. [Wine:
    http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/view-image.php?image=35183&picture=glass-of-red-wine;
    Gunpowder:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spk-RZ.jpg](File:Spk-RZ.jpg) .
    Public Domain
8.  Oil/vinegar: Kat (Flickr:tyger\_lyllie); Soil: Petr Kratochvil.
    [Oil/vinegar:
    http://www.flickr.com/photos/tyger\_lyllie/3350276971/; Soil:
    http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/view-image.php?image=13200&picture=soil-texture](view-image.php?image=13200&picture=soil-texture) .
    Oil/vinegar: CC BY 2.0; Soil: Public Domain
9.  Pearson Scott Foresman.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Distillation\_%28PSF%29.png](File:Distillation_%28PSF%29.png) .
    Public Domain
10. Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
11. Duff Axsom (Flickr:duff\_sf).
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/sfbear/472100458/]() . CC BY 2.0
12. User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn\_reaction\_with\_HCl.JPG](File:Zn_reaction_with_HCl.JPG) .
    Public Domain
13. Paige Powers (Flickr:paigggeyy).
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/paigggeyy/5533819494/]() . CC BY 2.0
14. Muddy water: Image copyright Alena Brozova, 2014; Sugar water: Image
    copyright m.bonotto, 2014.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    licenses from Shutterstock.com

<span id="3.html"></span>

# Measurement {#3.html#x-ck12-TWVhc3VyZW1lbnQ.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144155910.jpeg)
</span>

When we think of measurement, a couple of things may come to mind. We
may think of numbers, or we may think about instruments or equipment.
The scale shown above, for instance, is an example of a common
instrument that is used in measurement. In this case, the scale is
measuring the weight of citrus fruit. Adjacent to the fruit is a 1
kilogram weight. If we were getting fruit at the market, we would likely
purchase fruit in weight equivalents, like a kilogram or a pound, or
some fraction of these equivalents. Measurement, in this example, allows
us to measure quantities of fruit in a reliable fashion. Can you think
of other food items you might measure? You might measure the temperature
of a casserole, or the volume of milk used in a recipe, or the weight of
dough in a pizza. Measurements depend on estimates, like estimating the
weight of fruit. These estimates depend on reference points or
equivalents, like one kilogram or a fraction of a kilogram. We also use
measurement frequently in our study of the chemical world. Much of our
modern understanding of chemistry is based on our ability to measure
various physical quantities of chemical species.

^Image\\ copyright\\ Dimitar\\ Sotirov,\\ 2014.\\ www.shutterstock.com.\\ Used\\ under\\ license\\ from\\ Shutterstock.com.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686087] -->

# Units of Measurement {#3.html#x-ck12-VW5pdHMgb2YgTWVhc3VyZW1lbnQ.}

## Lesson Objectives {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-uec}

-   Distinguish between a quantity, a unit, and a measurement standard.
-   Distinguish between base units and derived units.
-   Perform calculations using the SI system of measurement, with the
    use of appropriate prefixes.
-   Name the SI units for length, mass, time, volume, and density.
-   Describe the concepts of magnitude and scale and how they relate
    to measurement.
-   Use scientific notation to report very small and very large numbers.
-   Be able to perform calculations with numbers that are reported in
    scientific notation.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-aw4}

-   **Systeme International (SI)** : A common metric system of units of
    measurement used by scientists.
-   **base unit** : A measurement that has its own independent scale and
    cannot be expressed in terms of other base units.
-   **derived unit** : A measurement that is a combination of
    base units.
-   **conversion factor** : A factor used in solving problems in which a
    certain measurement must be expressed with different units.
-   **dimensional analysis** : A technique that uses the
    units (dimensions) of the measurement in order to express quantities
    in the appropriate units.
-   **scientific notation** : A way to express very large and very small
    numbers as the product of two numbers: a coefficient and the number
    10 raised to a power.

## Check your Understanding {#3.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgeW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-dfm}

1.  What will it cost to carpet a room if the room is 10 feet wide and
    12 feet long? The carpet costs \$12.51 per square yard.
    1.  \$166.80
    2.  \$175.90
    3.  \$184.30
    4.  \$189.90
    5.  \$19.20

2.  What is the volume in cubic centimeters of the following cylinder,
    given that the lengths are expressed in centimeters?
3.  <span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
    <!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144283157.png)
    </span>
    1.  210.91 cm ^3^
    2.  226.20 cm ^3^
    3.  75.36 cm ^3^
    4.  904.32 cm ^3^
    5.  28.26 cm ^3^

4.  Kathy has three pieces of material. The first piece is 1 yd. 2 ft.
    6 in. long, the second piece is 2 yd. 1 ft. 5 in. long, and the
    third piece is 4 yd. 2 ft. 8 in. long. How much material does Kathy
    have?
    1.  7 yd. 1 ft. 8 in.
    2.  8 yd. 4 ft. 4 in.
    3.  8 yd. 11 in.
    4.  9 yd. 7 in.
    5.  10 yd.

## Introduction {#3.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-sxo}

We make measurements all the time in our daily lives without even
realizing it. When we walk, we visually measure the proximity of objects
in our environment. When we pick up an item, we measure its weight and
adjust our muscular response according to our initial estimates.
Measurements are observations of a quantitative nature that are taken by
some form of equipment. Some equipment, like our five senses, can give
us very approximate measurements, while other technology, like a scale,
provides more exact measurements. Many types of instruments are used to
measure and study our chemical world. Some of the common quantities we
measure in chemistry are distance (length), volume, mass, time,
velocity, temperature, density, pressure, amount, concentration, energy,
and electric charge. In this chapter, we will investigate how various
methods of measurement are used to study the chemical nature of matter.

## Measurement and Numbers {#3.html#x-ck12-TWVhc3VyZW1lbnQgYW5kIE51bWJlcnM.-shm}

Measurement is a fundamental aspect of science and chemistry. Our
understanding of the chemical world would not be possible if we did not
compare, contrast, categorize, and analyze our observations to obtain
the information we have about chemical substances. Let's consider water
as an example. Many of the qualitative (non-numerical) properties of
water, including its taste, smell, texture, and color, can be observed
using our senses. We can also measure quantitative (numerical)
properties of water by using equipment. For example, we can use a
thermometer to measure water’s boiling point in degrees Celsius or a
measuring cup to measure the volume of a given liquid.

There can be different units that are used to measure the same physical
quantity. For example, temperature can be expressed in degrees
Fahrenheit (°F), degrees Celsius (°C), or degrees Kelvin (K). No one set
of units is more correct than the other. However, as we begin measuring,
calculating, and sharing measurements, we will want a standard set of
values that we and others can use. An international governing body has
developed a metric system of units of measurement for scientists called
the **Système International (SI)** . Some of these units are listed in
**Table** [below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6YmFzZV91bml0cw..) .

  Physical Quantity     Name of SI Unit   Abbreviation
  --------------------- ----------------- --------------
  mass                  kilogram          kg
  length                meter             m
  time                  second            s or sec
  temperature           Kelvin            K
  amount of substance   mole              mol
  electric current      ampere            A
  luminous intensity    candela           cd

  :  SI Base Units

### Base Units vs. Derived Units {#3.html#x-ck12-QmFzZSBVbml0cyB2cy4gRGVyaXZlZCBVbml0cw..-ikv}

With the **base units** listed in the **Table**
[above](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6YmFzZV91bml0cw..) , we can describe many
physical details of a given chemical substance. Base units are
measurements that have their own independent scale and cannot be
expressed in terms of other base units. All other measurement
quantities, such as volume, force, and energy, can be derived from these
seven base units. For instance, volume is calculated by multiplying
together three different lengths (height, width, and depth). We call
these combinations of base units **derived units** . Some examples of
derived units are listed in **Table**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6U0lfRGVyaXZlZF91bml0cw..) .

  Physical Quantity   Name of SI Unit                Abbreviation
  ------------------- ------------------------------ ----------------------
  area                square meter                   m ^2^
  volume              cubic meter                    m ^3^
  speed, velocity     meter per second               m/s
  acceleration        meter per second squared       m/s ^2^
  force               Newton (mass × acceleration)   N (kg m/s ^2^ )
  mass density        kilogram per cubic meter       kg/m ^3^
  energy              joule (force × distance)       J (kg m ^2^ /s ^2^ )

  :  SI Derived Units

## Magnitude and Scale {#3.html#x-ck12-TWFnbml0dWRlIGFuZCBTY2FsZQ..-mng}

When we think about the physical quantities that are measured in
chemistry, we must also consider the concepts of magnitude and scale.
The following video introduces these concepts:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0](watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0)
(9:01).

[![](ck12_3_files/tmp4DZ3Pb.jpeg)](0fKBhvDjuy0%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3Db0b03346f5e5bffde6eccd63626e01c0)

Click on the image above for more content

As the video suggests, chemistry is a discipline in which we study
things that are very, very small. We measure things like the size of an
atom, which is approximately 1/10000000000 of a meter. Because
individual atoms are so small, the substances that we can actually see
and study, even something as small as a drop of rain, are comprised of
an incredibly large number of atoms. There are literally thousands of
billions of billions of particles in a drop of water. In both of these
examples, we expressed size in terms of fractions or multiples of the
number 10. When describing very small or very large physical quantities,
we use prefixes to write the unit as a power of 10. **Table**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6Y29tbW9uX3VzZWRfc2lfcHJlZml4ZXM.)
displays most of these prefixes.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6Y29tbW9uX3VzZWRfc2lfcHJlZml4ZXM.">

[![](images/table.png)](table_3-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

## The Relative Size of Things {#3.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFJlbGF0aXZlIFNpemUgb2YgVGhpbmdz-vic}

We can express the relative size of things with which we are familiar.
For instance, the **Figure**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtMDItcmVsYXRpdmVfc2l6ZQ..) shows the
height of a human as measured in meters, or 10 ^0^ scale. We see a dust
mite, measured in micrometers – 10 ^-6^ scale; and a virus, measured in
nanometers – 10 ^-9^ scale. These are examples of length related to
relative size and scale.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-Y2VjMjlmZThmODFlY2FiOTI3ZTVkZWUzMmM3YWJlNTQ.-twt"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson and Laura Guerin" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144399192.jpeg)

**Figure 3.1**

Relative size and scale of things.

</div>

## Dimensional Analysis {#3.html#x-ck12-RGltZW5zaW9uYWwgQW5hbHlzaXM.-yax}

**Conversion factors** are used in solving problems in which a certain
measurement must be expressed in different units. When a given
measurement is multiplied by an appropriate conversion factor, the
numerical value changes, but the actual size of the quantity measured
remains the same. **Dimensional analysis** is a technique that uses the
units (dimensions) of the measurement in order to correctly convert
between units to solve problems. Dimensional analysis is best
illustrated with an example.

**Example 3.3**

How many seconds are in a day?

Step 1: List the known conversion factors.

-   1 day = 24 hours
-   1 hour = 60 minutes
-   1 minute = 60 seconds

Step 2: Use the conversion factors as fractions to convert the given
units to the desired units.

The known quantities above represent the conversion factors that we will
use. The first conversion factor will have day in the denominator so
that the “day” unit will cancel. The second conversion factor will then
have hours in the denominator, while the third conversion factor will
have minutes in the denominator. As a result, the unit of the last
numerator will be seconds and that will be the units for the answer.

<dl id="x-ck12-qvt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uno">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-xos">
<dd>
![1 \\ \\cancel{\\text{d}} \\times \\frac{24 \\ \\cancel{\\text{h}}}{1
\\ \\cancel{\\text{d}}} \\times \\frac{60 \\ \\cancel{\\text{min}}}{1 \\
\\cancel{\\text{h}}} \\times \\frac{60 \\ \\text{s}}{1 \\
\\cancel{\\text{min}}}=86,400 \\
\\text{s}](ck12_math_images_dir/7b9eff7b3c8505238d6068e62c47f715.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this technique, we are essentially “multiplying by 1” several times.
For example, because 1 day is equal to 24 hours, a fraction in which one
of these values is in the numerator and the other is in the denominator
will be equal to 1. Because multiplying by 1 does not change the value
of a number, the final value is equivalent to the original one.

### Dimensional Analysis and the Metric System {#3.html#x-ck12-RGltZW5zaW9uYWwgQW5hbHlzaXMgYW5kIHRoZSBNZXRyaWMgU3lzdGVt-f4c}

The metric system’s many prefixes allow quantities to be expressed in
many different units. Dimensional analysis is useful to convert from one
metric system unit to another.

**Example 3.4**

A particular experiment requires 120 mL of a solution. The teacher knows
that he will need to make enough solution for 40 experiments to be
performed throughout the day. How many liters of solution should he
prepare?

Step 1: Perform the calculation.

<dl id="x-ck12-wyb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uga">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-1tt">
<dd>
![120 \\ \\text{mL} \\times 40 = 4800 \\
\\text{mL}](ck12_math_images_dir/68177465ca10cf9b343f865b2df984df.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Step 2: Use a metric conversion factor (1 L = 1000 mL) to convert the
given units to the desired units.

<dl id="x-ck12-dan">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-wf3">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-elk">
<dd>
![4800 \\ \\cancel{\\text{mL}} \\times \\frac{1 \\ \\text{L}}{1000 \\
\\cancel{\\text{mL}}}=4.8 \\
\\text{L}](ck12_math_images_dir/ce78c3117bdbff42a80b09ba4afaf55d.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Note that the conversion factor is arranged so that the mL unit is in
the denominator. It therefore cancels out, leaving L as the remaining
unit in the answer.

Some metric conversion problems are most easily solved by breaking them
down into more than one step. When both the given unit and the desired
unit have prefixes, one can first convert to the simple (unprefixed)
unit, followed by a conversion to the desired unit. An example will
illustrate this method.

**Example 3.5**

Convert 4.3 cm to μm.

Step 1: List the known conversion factors.

-   1 m = 100 cm
-   1 m = 10 ^6^ μm

Step 2: Use the conversion factors as fractions to convert the given
units to the desired units.

<dl id="x-ck12-vcq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-9u8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-cvc">
<dd>
![4.3 \\ \\cancel{\\text{cm}} \\times \\frac{1 \\
\\cancel{\\text{m}}}{100 \\ \\cancel{\\text{cm}}} \\times \\frac{10\^6
\\ \\mu \\text{m}}{1 \\ \\cancel{\\text{m}}}=43,000 \\ \\mu
\\text{m}](ck12_math_images_dir/04580faecfbc96f42d13964dc14926b3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Each conversion factor is written so that unit of the denominator
cancels with the unit of the numerator of the previous factor.

## Scientific Notation {#3.html#x-ck12-U2NpZW50aWZpYyBOb3RhdGlvbg..-3xd}

**Scientific notation** is a way to express numbers as the product of
two numbers: a coefficient and the number 10 raised to a power. A
coefficient is a numerical value that comes before the multiplying
number, in this case the number 10 raised to a power. As an example, the
distance from Earth to the Sun is about 150,000,000,000 meters – a very
large distance indeed. In scientific notation, the distance is written
as 1.5 × 10 ^11^ m. The coefficient is 1.5 and must be a number greater
than or equal to 1 and less than 10. The power of 10, or exponent, is
11. See **Figure** [below](#3.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDMtMDEtU3Vu) for two
more examples of scientific notation. Scientific notation is sometimes
referred to as exponential notation.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-YWE2MWM2ZDFkNTY4NmI2OTA3YzhjNTUzNTRiZjhkYmI.-exf"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of NASA/SDO" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The_Sun_by_the_Atmospheric_Imaging_Assembly_of_NASA%27s_Solar_Dynamics_Observatory_-_20100819.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144514985.jpeg)

**Figure 3.2**

The Sun is very large and very distant, so solar data is better
expressed in scientific notation. The mass of the Sun is 2.0 × 10 ^30^
kg and its diameter is 1.4 × 10 ^9^ m.

</div>

Very small numbers can also be expressed using scientific notation. The
mass of an electron in decimal notation is
0.000000000000000000000000000911 grams. In scientific notation, the mass
is expressed as 9.11 × 10 ^-28^ g. Notice that the value of the exponent
is chosen so that the coefficient is between 1 and 10.

**Example 3.4**

A common mosquito weights approximately 0.0000025 kg. Write the
mosquito's weight in scientific notation.

In scientific notation we will write this quantity as a coefficient
multiplied by 10 raised to some power.

Step 1: Our coefficient must be a number between 1 and 10. From
0.0000025 kg, we determine the coefficient to be 2.5.

Step 2: The quantity 0.0000025 kg is less than 1, so 10 must be raised
to a negative exponent. The decimal place must be moved to the right by
6 places to write the coefficient 2.5, so we will write 10 ^-6^ as our
power of 10

Step 3: Coefficient + Power of 10. This gives us 2.5 × 10 ^-6^ kg.
Remember, our units in this case have not changed, we are just changing
the way we are writing the numerical value.

### Adding and Subtracting {#3.html#x-ck12-QWRkaW5nIGFuZCBTdWJ0cmFjdGluZw..-r1s}

There are times when we will want to add or subtract numbers that are
expressed in scientific notation. We will approach such calculations in
one of two ways.

**Same Base Units**

**Example 3.5**

![1.235 \\times 10\^3\\; \\text{meters} + 3.45 \\times 10\^2\\;
\\text{meters}](ck12_math_images_dir/0e2b0426e5510eee72df72ac55ae9144.png)

Step 1: Convert numbers to regular notation.

![1235 \\; \\text{meters} + 345 \\;
\\text{meters}](ck12_math_images_dir/e03b9733857e6cf513d9cc745f7f64ca.png)

Step 2: Add.

![ 1235 \\; \\text{meters} \\\\\\underline{+ \\ 345 \\; \\text{meters}}
\\\\1580\\;
\\text{meters}](ck12_math_images_dir/b7a51ea36b1845ef77cdbfd3f6530c72.png)

Step 3: Convert back to scientific notation (depending on the result,
this is not always necessary).

![1.580 \\times 10\^3 \\;
\\text{m}](ck12_math_images_dir/893f75c4b2810ec046c4f35073a9ea62.png)

We would follow the same steps for subtraction, as well as for numbers
with negative exponents.

**Different Base Units**

**Example 3.6**

![1.5 \\times 10\^2 \\ \\text{liters} - 3.45 \\times 10\^2 \\
\\text{deciliters}](ck12_math_images_dir/e2e27037909e0b9baab3a8985988632a.png)

Step 1: Convert numbers to regular notation.

![150 \\ \\text{liters} - 345 \\
\\text{deciliters}](ck12_math_images_dir/abce56f08bc35aa16af1d2bbcc4a736c.png)

Step 2: Decide on which unit you want the final answer to be expressed
as and convert the numbers to this unit.

![345 \\ \\cancel{\\text{dL}} \\times \\left ( \\dfrac{1 \\
\\text{L}}{10 \\ \\cancel{\\text{dL}}} \\right)=34.5 \\ \\text{L}
](ck12_math_images_dir/4caf2ed484ea1c82921008629d640a23.png)

Step 3: Subtract.

![150 \\ \\text{L} - 34.5 \\ \\text{L} = 115.5 \\
\\text{L}](ck12_math_images_dir/7385a1eb537bf9ee77b506d30da7804d.png)

Step 4: Convert to scientific notation.

![1.155 \\times 10\^2 \\
\\text{L}](ck12_math_images_dir/276e36398e884dbe42bce2e6ea2442ab.png)

### Multiplying and Dividing {#3.html#x-ck12-TXVsdGlwbHlpbmcgYW5kIERpdmlkaW5n-jky}

**Same Base Units**

**Example 3.7**

![(4.65 \\times 10\^3 \\ \\text{meters}) \\times (3.56 \\times 10\^2 \\
\\text{meters})](ck12_math_images_dir/f9de0de42dc9c9cbb15f4adc7f009cee.png)

Step 1: Group the coefficients and the exponential terms together.

![(4.65 \\times 3.56) \\times (10\^3 \\times 10\^2)\\ \\text{meters}
\\times
\\text{meters}](ck12_math_images_dir/837c574508728a0e749a6886ae046b49.png)

Step 2: Multiply coefficients and add the exponents.

![(16.55) \\times (10\^5)\\
\\text{meters}\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/727e645e6ff1aaf9af6c91d02ecdb364.png)

Step 3: Change to scientific notation. Remember that the coefficient
must be a number between 1 and 10.

![1.655 \\times 10\^6 \\
\\text{m}\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/bab565174bd80aa9693564bbab1180a8.png)

Note that when two values are multiplied together, the units are
multiplied as well. This is different than the case for addition and
subtraction, where the units for the answer are the same as the units
for each of the starting values.

**Different Base Units**

The procedure here is the same, except that a conversion is made so that
both values are expressed in the same units.

**Example 3.8**

![(4.65 \\times 10\^{-4} \\; \\text{liters}) \\times (3.56 \\times
10\^2\\;
\\text{milliliters})](ck12_math_images_dir/5d503ba2f3724140300b1d075173cfe6.png)

Step 1: Convert to a common unit.

In this case, we chose the common unit to be milliliters.

![4.65 \\times 10\^{-4} \\ \\cancel{\\text{L}} \\times \\left
(\\dfrac{1000 \\ \\text{mL}}{1 \\ \\cancel{\\text{L}}}\\right) = 4.65
\\times 10\^{-1} \\
\\text{mL}](ck12_math_images_dir/049d7a14d86dd3b2d79d086dc284235c.png)

Step 2: Group the coefficients and the exponential terms together.

![(4.65 \\times 3.56) \\times (10\^{-1} \\times 10\^2) \\
\\text{mL}\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/ec3b9954fd34bd67691ddb3a7e72d5d7.png)

Step 3: Multiply coefficients and add the exponents.

![(16.55) \\times (10\^1)=165.5 \\
\\text{mL}\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/a74c2b6084b9240f60084240196ee28a.png)

Step 4: Change to scientific notation.

![1.655 \\times 10\^2 \\
\\text{mL}\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/0e73b1934270f00128e47579182d90e8.png)

## Lesson Summary {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-meu}

-   Measurement is the process of making an observation in terms of a
    numerical scale and recording the value.
-   In chemistry, we measure things that range from extremely small to
    extremely large. Common quantities measured include distance, mass,
    time, temperature, volume, density, pressure, amount, concentration,
    energy, velocity, molarity, viscosity, and electric charge.
-   Because chemistry deals with very large and very small physical
    quantities, we utilize powers of 10 to express base units and
    derived units.
-   Base units have independent scales and cannot be described by a
    combination of any other base units. Examples of base units used in
    chemistry are length, mass, temperature, and time.
-   Derived units can be expressed as some combination of base units.
    Examples of derived units are area, volume, and speed.
-   The Systeme International (SI) is a standard metric system of units
    that is used by scientists.
-   Dimensional analysis is a method of problem solving in which
    conversion factors are arranged so that a value can be converted
    from one set of units to another.

## Lesson Review Questions {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-7nm}

1.  Convert the following numbers to scientific notation.
    1.  13,000,000
    2.  4020.0
    3.  0.00040
    4.  0.0004002

2.  Convert the following using conversion factors given in the table of
    Commonly Used SI Prefixes.
    1.  126 kg to grams
    2.  826 mL to L
    3.  2.45 × 10 ^-12^ g to nanograms
    4.  1.24 × 10 ^-12^ meters to picometers

3.  Perform the following calculations, and write your final answer in
    scientific notation.
    1.  1.06 × 10 ^3^ kilograms + 8.6 × 10 ^13^ nanograms
    2.  100.06 mL + 35 L
    3.  3.56 × 10 ^5^ cm + 1.23 × 10 ^2^ m

4.  Which SI unit and prefixes would be used to report the following
    1.  A person’s weight
    2.  The length of a ladybug
    3.  The volume of a large lake
    4.  The weight of a human hair
    5.  The width of a human hair

5.  Calculate the number of seconds in the month of December.
6.  How many donuts can you buy with \$23.00 if they cost \$3.00/dozen?
7.  A light year is the distance light travels in one year. Sirius (the
    dog star), the brightest in the sky, is approximately 8.6 light
    years from Earth. How far (in km) from Earth is it if light travels
    3.0 × 10 ^8^ m/s?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#3.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-bmj}

-   Robinson, A. (2007). The Story of Measurement. New York: Thames
    and Hudson.
-   Mass of snowflake approximation:
    [http://hypertextbook.com/facts/2001/JudyMoy.shtml](JudyMoy.shtml)

## Points to Consider {#3.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-31a}

-   In this lesson we discussed base units and derived units. We saw
    that there are SI base and derived units. Can you think of base
    units or derived units you are familiar with that are not SI units?
-   What do you suppose might be the difference between a measurement
    and a number? How might they be the same or different?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686087] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686088] -->

# Unit Conversions, Error, and Uncertainty {#3.html#x-ck12-VW5pdCBDb252ZXJzaW9ucywgRXJyb3IsIGFuZCBVbmNlcnRhaW50eQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-olw}

-   Differentiate between accuracy and precision as they relate to a
    given measurement.
-   Describe the reliability of a measurement and how it can be
    expressed in terms of uncertainty.
-   Distinguish between mass and weight and describe how mass and weight
    are determined.
-   Understand the concept of volume and how it can be determined for
    various substances, including regularly shaped and irregularly
    shaped solids.
-   Define density and perform density calculations.
-   Describe how many significant figures there are in a given
    measurement, and be able to perform measurement calculations
    involving numbers with significant figures.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-y8o}

-   **meniscus** : The curved upper surface of a liquid in a tube.
-   **estimate** : A process of referencing a physical quantity in terms
    of a calibration or reference point.
-   **uncertainty** : All measurements have an uncertainty equal to one
    half of the smallest difference between reference marks.
-   **accuracy** : Describes how close an estimate is to a
    known standard.
-   **precision** : Describes how close estimates are to one another.
-   **calibration** : A method of setting or correcting a measuring
    device by matching it to known measurement standards.
-   **percent uncertainty** : The ratio of the uncertainty to the
    measured value, multiplied by one hundred.
-   **percent error** : An expression of the accuracy of a measurement,
    standardized to how large the measurement is.
-   **significant figures** : Consist of all the certain digits in that
    measurement plus one uncertain or estimated digit.
-   **density** : An expression of the mass of substance in terms of the
    volume occupied by the substance.
-   **mass** : The quantity of inertia possessed by an object.
-   **weight** : The gravitational force acting on a mass, as measured
    on a scale.
-   **Fahrenheit scale** : The most commonly used scale in the United
    States, it defines the normal freezing point and boiling point of
    water as 32°F and 212°F, respectively.
-   **Celsius scale** : The most commonly used scale around the world,
    it defines the normal freezing point and boiling point of water as
    0°C and 100°C, respectively.
-   **Kelvin scale** : Referred to as the absolute temperature scale, it
    defines absolute zero as the lowest theoretically
    possible temperature.

## Check Your Understanding {#3.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-si2}

1.  What will it cost to carpet a room if the room is 10 feet wide and
    20 feet long, and the price of carpet is \$2.36 per ft ^2^ ?
2.  Which of the following is the larger amount: 2.35 × 10 ^2^ L or 3.46
    × 10 ^5^ mL?
3.  List two SI units that would be appropriate for measuring each of
    the following quantities: volume, weight, and length.

## Introduction {#3.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-arz}

In the last lesson, we studied the concept of measurement and how
numbers are used to express various physical quantities. We studied
scale and magnitude and investigated how to use scientific notation and
SI units to report numbers in an efficient and consistent manner.
However, we have not yet studied how measurement takes place. There are
many different measurements we make in our investigations of the
chemical world. Measurements such as distance, volume, and mass are
important values that are frequently used to describe the
characteristics and behavior of chemical species. To make measurements,
we use instruments labeled with a known scale. However, it is impossible
for measurements to be exact. In this lesson, we are going to study how
measurements are made as well as the error and uncertainty involved in
measurements.

## Uncertainty {#3.html#x-ck12-VW5jZXJ0YWludHk._1-zmx}

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-p3v"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" --> <!-- @@url="CK12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144617747.png)

**Figure 3.3**

</div>

**Figure** [above](#3.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW0tMDMtMDItbWVuaXNjdXM.) shows a
graduated cylinder, which is an instrument that is used to measure
volume. The graduated cylinder gets its name because of the gradation or
scaled lines drawn on its side. These serve as reference points that
correspond to known volumes. When we make a measurement using a
graduated cylinder, we look at the **meniscus** , or curved surface, of
the liquid and **estimate** where the bottom of the meniscus is relative
to the gradations. All measurement devices have reference marks of some
kind. Can you think of another example of a measurement device with
regular reference marks?

**Example 3.9**

Make an estimate of the volume that is shown in **Figure**
[above](#3.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW0tMDMtMDItbWVuaXNjdXM.) .

*Answer:*

*We see the bottom of the meniscus is at approximately 52.9 mL. We
report this in mL because our cylinder is a 100 mL graduated cylinder,
with mL reference marks. There are 9 equally spaced marks between the 50
mL and 60 mL lines, so each one must represent 1 mL. As we will see
next, the space between these marks represents an area of uncertainty
with regard to the estimate.*

When the volume in our previous example was reported to be 52.9 mL, the
**uncertainty** associated with this estimate also needed to be
reported. For example, we know for certain that the true value for the
volume must be between 52 mL and 53 mL. However, there is uncertainty
regarding how close the value is to 52 or 53. We estimated the volume to
be 52.9, but some students may have reported 52.8 or 53.0. These would
be accurate estimates because they fall within the acceptable
uncertainty of the device. All measurements have an uncertainty equal to
one half of the smallest difference between reference marks. For our
graduated cylinder, there is 1 mL between consecutive marks, so the
uncertainty is one half of that value, 0.5 mL. To be rigorous about our
certainty regarding this measured value, the estimate of 52.9 mL should
be reported as 52.9 ± 0.5 mL.

### Accuracy {#3.html#x-ck12-QWNjdXJhY3k._1-qsg}

In measuring quantities we always aim for high **accuracy** . Estimates
that fall within the range of uncertainty for a given instrument are
said to be accurate. In our previous example, all of the values between
and including 52.4 mL and 53.4 mL would be considered accurate.
Estimates that fall outside this range are inaccurate. Accuracy
describes how close an estimate is to a known standard.

### Precision {#3.html#x-ck12-UHJlY2lzaW9u_1-fv5}

**Precision** describes how close estimates are to one another.
Estimates that are relatively close to one another are precise. Let’s
assume that ten different students made an estimate of the volume shown
in **Figure** [above](#3.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW0tMDMtMDItbWVuaXNjdXM.) , and
the values were: 52.9, 52.8, 52.9, 52.9, 53.3, 52.0, 52.8, 52.9, 53.0,
52.8. We can determine how precise these data by analyzing how close
they are to an average. The average could be the mean, median or mode.
The most common understanding of the average is the mean. This value is
calculated by adding up all the numbers and then dividing by the total
number of values. Other terms that can refer to the average are the
median and the mode. The median is the middle value in a numerically
ordered list of numbers. The mode is the value that occurs most often in
a set of numbers. If no number is repeated, there is no mode for the
list. Here are the calculated averages:

![\\text{Mean}=\\dfrac{52.9+52.8+52.9+52.9+53.3+52.0+52.8+52.9+53.0+52.8}{10}=52.8](ck12_math_images_dir/86ebc6dbb4c849a8a7a7e56d4db99c40.png)

![\\text{Median}=52.0, 52.8, 52.8, 52.8, \[52.9\], 52.9, 52.9, 52.9,
53.0,
53.3=52.9](ck12_math_images_dir/93d7b92c2192dd9e3fb82054a59a4cf9.png)

![\\text{Mode}=52.0, 52.8, 52.8, 52.8, \[52.9, 52.9, 52.9, 52.9\], 53.0,
53.3=52.9](ck12_math_images_dir/c514de036225c0b37570c16b252ac68b.png)

Based on this analysis, we see the value 52.8 was the mean, and 52.9 was
the median and mode. Therefore, values that are relatively close to
these averages would be considered precise. We can also calculate the
standard deviation for these data, which is a more refined way of
determining the precision of estimates. However, we will not concern
ourselves with standard deviation at this point.

### Accuracy vs. Precision {#3.html#x-ck12-QWNjdXJhY3kgdnMuIFByZWNpc2lvbg.._1-rvm}

As we just saw, accuracy describes how close a given set of data is to
the “real” value, while precision describes how close the data points
are to one another. These concepts are illustrated in **Figure**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtMDItYWNjdXJhY3lwcmVjaXNpb24.) .

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-NjVkNmEzNWNlMWU0YTEwYzJjNjExOGVkZmUxN2ZmYTg.-2xp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" --> <!-- @@url="CK12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144734311.png)

**Figure 3.4**

Here we see three darts thrown at four different targets. Accurate shots
would be those that were close to the bull’s-eye (the inner circle).
Precision would be the shots that were close to one another.

</div>

Target A represents the best possible “data”. All of the data point
points are clustered in the center, close to the “actual” value and
close to one another. This data is both accurate and precise. In target
B, the set of data has good accuracy overall if the points are averaged
together. However, the three points are not very close to each other
making the imprecise. Target C, on the other hand, shows precise but
inaccurate data. The three data points are close together, making them
precise, but are far from the center of the target, giving low accuracy.
Target D represents the worst possible “data”. The data points are far
from the center of the target lacking any accuracy, as well as being far
apart from each other, lacking precision.

### Calibration {#3.html#x-ck12-Q2FsaWJyYXRpb24._1-4vp}

When using measuring devices, we often use a technique called
**calibration** to increase the accuracy of our measurements.
Calibration is a method of setting or correcting a measuring device by
matching it to known measurement standards. To better understand
calibration, we will look at the example of calibrating a thermometer.
All thermometers are slightly different in their temperature readings.
One way to calibrate a thermometer is by using the freezing point and
boiling point of water ( **Figure**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtVGhlcm1vbWV0ZXI.) ). If we know that
water freezes at 0°C and boils at 100°C, we can calibrate our
thermometer by measuring the temperature of ice water and of boiling
water. We place the thermometer in ice water and wait for the
thermometer liquid to reach a stable height, then place a mark at this
height which represents 0°C. Then we place the thermometer in boiling
water, and after waiting for the thermometer liquid to reach a stable
height, we place a mark at this height which represents 100°C. We can
then place 100 equally spaced divisions between our 0 and 100°C marks to
each represent 1°C. Our thermometer has now been calibrated using the
known values for the freezing point and boiling point of water, and can
be used to measure temperatures of objects between 0 and 100°C.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-MmNhMDgxMDA0NmZiYmQ0OTAyM2EzZDE1Y2RjODgzYTk.-yqs"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144842058.jpeg)

**Figure 3.5**

A thermometer can be calibrated by measuring the freezing point (0°C)
and the boiling point (100°C) of water. One hundred equally spaced
divisions can then be made between 0 and 100°C.

</div>

Calibration is used to standardize a variety of measuring devices,
including meter sticks, graduated cylinders, scales, and thermometers.
It is a good idea to calibrate any measuring equipment you use in an
experiment to make sure the data you are collecting is measured as
accurately as possible.

### Percent Uncertainty {#3.html#x-ck12-UGVyY2VudCBVbmNlcnRhaW50eQ.._1-r32}

To express the uncertainty in a measurement, we can calculate **percent
uncertainty** . Percent uncertainty is the ratio of the uncertainty to
the measured value, multiplied by one-hundred. For instance, the percent
uncertainty associated with the measurement of (52.9 ± 0.5 mL), would be

![ \\% \\; \\text{uncertainty} = \\dfrac{0.5}{52.9} \\times 100 = 0.95
\\% \\approx 1 \\%
](ck12_math_images_dir/0f631208e8be48eb84f04ea8c84b8353.png)

**Example 3.10**

Using our estimate of 52.9 mL, what would be the range of possible
values for the true volume?

*Answer*

*Upper estimate = 52.9 + 0.5 = 53.4 mL*

*Lower estimate = 52.9 - 0.5 = 52.4 mL*

*Assuming that our equipment is accurate, we can be confident that the
true volume of the sample is somewhere in between these two values.'*

### Percent Error {#3.html#x-ck12-UGVyY2VudCBFcnJvcg.._1-o5k}

On the other hand, **percent error** is an expression of the accuracy of
a measurement. There are various possible sources of error that arise in
measurement. For example, there can be error associated with the
observation, like misreading a graduated cylinder. There is error
associated with the method or the procedure, like not drying a wet solid
before weighing. Error can also arise from the object being measured.
For example, a pure solid may have a residue fixed to it that affects
its mass. There can also be errors that arise from the measurement
instrument, like not zeroing a balance, or improper calibration. Percent
error is calculated as follows:

![\\% \\; \\text{error}=\\dfrac{|\\text{Measured} -
\\text{Accepted}|}{\\text{Accepted}} \\times
100](ck12_math_images_dir/ddd22ecc429a7f1370e10c04d5d9095c.png)

**Example 3.11**

Make an estimate of volume for the image shown in **Figure**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW0tMDMtMDItZ3JhZHVhdGVkY3lsaW5kZXI.) , and
answer the questions below.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-cv8"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" --> <!-- @@url="CK12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235144963591.png)

**Figure 3.6**

</div>

Which of the following estimates would be accurate? Report your answer
in terms of uncertainty.

Which of the following sets of estimates would be *most* precise?

If a student reported a volume of 45.0 mL, calculate the percent error
in his or her measurement if the actual volume is exactly 43.0 mL.

## Significant Figures {#3.html#x-ck12-U2lnbmlmaWNhbnQgRmlndXJlcw.._1-rlh}

The **significant figures** in a measurement consist of all the certain
digits in that measurement plus one uncertain or estimated digit. In the
graduated cylinder example from the previous section, the measured value
was reported to be 52.9 mL, which includes 3 significant figures. In a
correctly reported measurement, the final digit is significant but not
certain. Insignificant digits are not reported. It would not be
incorrect to report the volume as 52.923 mL, because even the tenths
place (the 9) is uncertain, so no reasonable estimate could be made for
any of the following digits.

When you look at a reported measurement, it is necessary to be able to
count the number of significant figures. **Table**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtMy41) details the rules for
determining the number of significant figures in a reported measurement.
For the examples in the table, assume that the quantities are correctly
reported values of a measured quantity.

+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Rule                                 | Examples                             |
+======================================+======================================+
| 1\. All nonzero digits in a measurem | A. 237 has three significant         |
| ent are significant                  | figures.                             |
|                                      |                                      |
|                                      | B. 1.897 has four significant        |
|                                      | figures.                             |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 2\. Zeros that appear between other  | A. 39,004 has five significant       |
| nonzero digits are always            | figures.                             |
| significant.                         |                                      |
|                                      | B. 5.02 has three significant        |
|                                      | figures.                             |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 3\. Zeros that appear in front of al | A. 0.008 has one significant figure. |
| l of the nonzero digits are called   |                                      |
| left-end zeros. Left-end zeros are n | B. 0.000416 has three significant    |
| ever significant.                    | figures.                             |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 4\. Zeros that appear after all nonz | A. 140 has two significant figures.  |
| ero digits are called right-end      |                                      |
| zeros. Right-end zeros in a number t | B. 75,210 has four significant       |
| hat lacks a decimal point are not    | figures.                             |
| significant.                         |                                      |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 5\. Right-end zeros in a number with | A. 620.0 has four significant        |
|  a decimal point are significant.    | figures.                             |
| This is true whether the zeros occur |                                      |
|  before or after the decimal point.  | B. 19,000. has five significant      |
|                                      | figures                              |
+--------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

:  Significant Figure Rules

It needs to be emphasized that just because a certain digit is not
significant does not mean that it is not important or that it can be
left out. Though the zero in a measurement of 140 may not be
significant, the value cannot simply be reported as 14. An insignificant
zero functions as a placeholder for the decimal point. When numbers are
written in scientific notation, this becomes more apparent. The
measurement 140 can be written as 1.4 × 10 ^2^ , with two significant
figures in the coefficient. A number with left-end zeros, such as
0.000416, can be written as 4.16 × 10 ^−4^ , which has 3 significant
figures. In some cases, scientific notation is the only way to correctly
indicate the correct number of significant figures. In order to report a
value of 15,000,000 with four significant figures, it would need to be
written as 1.500 × 10 ^7^ . The right-end zeros after the 5 are
significant. The original number of 15,000,000 only has two significant
figures.

### Exact Quantities {#3.html#x-ck12-RXhhY3QgUXVhbnRpdGllcw.._1-bzv}

When numbers are known exactly, the significant figure rules do not
apply. This occurs when objects are counted rather than measured. In
your science classroom, there may be a total of 24 students. The actual
value cannot be 23.8 students, as there is no such thing as 8 tenths of
a student. So the 24 is an exact quantity. Exact quantities are
considered to have an infinite number of significant figures; the
importance of this concept will be seen later when we begin looking at
how significant figures are dealt with during calculations. Numbers in
many conversion factors, especially for simple unit conversions, are
also exact quantities and have infinite significant figures. There are
exactly 100 centimeters in 1 meter and exactly 60 seconds in 1 minute.
Those values are definitions and are not the result of a measurement.

### Adding and Subtracting Significant Figures {#3.html#x-ck12-QWRkaW5nIGFuZCBTdWJ0cmFjdGluZyBTaWduaWZpY2FudCBGaWd1cmVz_1-4fv}

The sum or difference is determined by the smallest number of
significant figures to the right of the decimal point in any of the
original numbers.

**Example 3.13**

![89.332+1.1=90.432\\ \\ \\ \\text{round to }
90.4](ck12_math_images_dir/2337ba22247d8988e888645f74e5632b.png)

**Example 3.14**

![2.097-0.12=1.977\\ \\ \\ \\text{round to }
1.98](ck12_math_images_dir/a8c923a68fb8e8ad007553bb696ebe1d.png)

### Multiplying and Dividing Significant Figures {#3.html#x-ck12-TXVsdGlwbHlpbmcgYW5kIERpdmlkaW5nIFNpZ25pZmljYW50IEZpZ3VyZXM._1-zdl}

The number of significant figures in the final product or quotient is
equal to the number of significant figures in the starting value that
has the fewest significant figures.

**Example 3.15**

![2.8 \\times 4.5039=12.61092\\ \\ \\ \\text{round to
}13](ck12_math_images_dir/306104300c4c03b57596a16b661f080a.png)

**Example 3.16**

![6.85 \\div 112.04=0.0611388789\\ \\ \\ \\text{round to }
0.0611](ck12_math_images_dir/797cc43b60f74559090e606dd1e05a75.png)

**Example 3.17**

For this example, the value 8 is known to be exact (so it has an
infinite number of significant figures).

![0.2786 \\times
8=2.229](ck12_math_images_dir/9528c5d42ef482ec86069ed7e62ab2e0.png)

## Calculating Density {#3.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpbmcgRGVuc2l0eQ.._1-zrw}

Imagine holding a tennis ball in one hand and an orange in the other.
Why does the orange feel heavier than the tennis ball, even though the
two objects are about the same size? This can be explained with the
concept of **density** . Density is an expression of the mass of a
substance in terms of the volume occupied by the substance. The equation
for density is:

![\\text{Density}=\\dfrac{\\text{mass}}{\\text{volume}}](ck12_math_images_dir/c2e41728d6db689fa4ea902d44625ad4.png)

![D=\\dfrac{m}{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/418244b179a88a54dfd2d587b4f37f65.png)

So, even though a tennis ball and an orange may be about the same
volume, the orange contains more mass within that volume than does the
tennis ball. Therefore, the orange has a higher density. This is because
the orange contains mostly water and the tennis ball contains mostly
air; as you might imagine, water is much heavier than air.

Density is typically reported in terms of gram per milliliter (g/mL) or
the equivalent value, grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm ^3^ ).
Oftentimes, scientists compare the density of an object to the density
of water which is 1 g/mL at room temperature (25°C). The densities of
some common materials are listed in the **Table**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6Y29tbW9uX2RlbnNpdGllcw..) .

  Material   Density (g/mL)
  ---------- ----------------
  hydrogen   0.00009
  oxygen     0.0014
  water      1.0
  aluminum   2.7
  iron       7.9
  gold       19.3

### Mass vs. Weight {#3.html#x-ck12-TWFzcyB2cy4gV2VpZ2h0_1-r0q}

The terms mass and weight, while often used interchangeably, are
technically different terms. **Mass** is the quantity of inertia
possessed by an object. **Weight** refers to the gravitational force
acting on a mass, as measured on a scale. On the surface of the earth,
the numerical values of mass and the corresponding force of gravity
(weight) are approximately equivalent. For now, we will use the terms
mass and weight interchangeably although mass is the more appropriate
scientific term.

### Determining the Volume of Regularly Shaped Objects {#3.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgdGhlIFZvbHVtZSBvZiBSZWd1bGFybHkgU2hhcGVkIE9iamVjdHM._1-4ma}

In order to calculate density, we must know the volume the object
occupies. We can calculate the volumes of some regularly shaped objects
using the following expressions in **Table**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6Rm9ybXVsYXNfZm9yX3ZvbHVtZXM.) .

  Volume of a cube       ![l \\times w \\times h](ck12_math_images_dir/56d08b8eded5c180f44852adc0ac8a5c.png)
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Volume of a sphere     ![\\dfrac{4}{3}\\pi r\^3](ck12_math_images_dir/5e8dd63f768bf602180adbe0bb05f5ec.png)
  Volume of a cylinder   ![\\pi r\^2 h](ck12_math_images_dir/7636c397d77fd22d8ff428dce552ba23.png)
  Volume of a cone       ![\\dfrac{1}{3}\\pi r\^2 h](ck12_math_images_dir/016a798cb4df572a75bf27cdabc2d980.png)

  :  Formulas for Calculating Volumes of Regularly Shaped Objects

### Determining the Volume of Irregularly Shaped Objects {#3.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgdGhlIFZvbHVtZSBvZiBJcnJlZ3VsYXJseSBTaGFwZWQgT2JqZWN0cw.._1-mka}

If a solid is irregularly shaped, we can determine its volume by
measuring the volume of water displaced by the solid. For example, say
you want to measure the volume of the toy dinosaur in **Figure**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW0tMDMtMDItdm9sdW1lZGlzcGxhY2Vk) . After
placing the dinosaur in the water, the volume measured in the container
increases by an amount that is equal to the total volume of the
dinosaur. Note that this method only works for solids that do not
dissolve in water. If you tried to measure the volume occupied by a pile
of salt, the salt would dissolve in the water and this method would not
work very well.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-N2I4ZmU5MTE3NDBiZDE2M2E2NDE2ZTA5Y2ZjZjQ0NWU.-xst"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235145075766.png)

**Figure 3.7**

Displacement of water by irregular solid.

</div>

## Temperature Scales {#3.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgU2NhbGVz_1-48q}

There are three temperature scales that are commonly used in
measurement. Their units are °F (degrees Fahrenheit), °C (degrees
Celsius), and K (Kelvin). The **Fahrenheit scale** , which is the most
commonly used scale in the United States, defines the normal freezing
point and boiling point of water as 32°F and 212°F, respectively. The
**Celsius scale** defines the normal freezing point and boiling point of
water as 0°C and 100°C, respectively. The Celsius scale is commonly used
in most countries across the globe. The **Kelvin scale** , which is also
referred to as the absolute temperature scale, defines absolute zero as
the lowest theoretically possible temperature, which means that
temperatures expressed in Kelvin cannot be negative numbers. We will
further study the origins of this temperature scale in the chapter
*States of Matter* .

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-diy"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235145192150.jpeg)

**Figure 3.8**

</div>

### Converting Temperature Scales {#3.html#x-ck12-Q29udmVydGluZyBUZW1wZXJhdHVyZSBTY2FsZXM._1-joa}

Regardless of the temperature scale used, it is important to be able to
convert from one scale to another. Here are the conversions we use.

**°F to °C**

![T\_{\^\\circ C}=(T\_{\^\\circ F}-32) \\times
\\frac{5}{9}](ck12_math_images_dir/de7e9c683b04903b207f4b345ba4a00f.png)

**°C to °F**

![T\_{\^\\circ F}=\\frac{9}{5} \\times (T\_{\^\\circ
C})+32](ck12_math_images_dir/9cbb0657c9cb78641df7ff372ac6794a.png)

**°C to K**

![T\_K=T\_{\^\\circ
C}+273.15](ck12_math_images_dir/1023b938e49f56430d2ed2c0000a0ead.png)

**K to °C**

![T\_{\^\\circ
C}=T\_K-273.15](ck12_math_images_dir/80571892ec0489e75e0a2e24b416cb54.png)

**Example 3.19**

The melting point of mercury is -38.84°C. Convert this value to degrees
Fahrenheit and degrees Kelvin.

*Answer*

![T\_{\^\\circ F}&=\\frac{9}{5} \\times (-38.84\^\\circ \\text{C})+32
\\\\\\T\_{\^\\circ F}&=-37.12 \^\\circ \\text{F}
\\\\\\T\_K&=-38.84\^\\circ \\text{C}+273.15 \\\\\\T\_K&=234.75 \\
\\text{K}](ck12_math_images_dir/d77ec52f41351749e28e0be9285238dc.png)

## Lesson Summary {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-xjb}

-   Accuracy describes how close an estimate is to a known standard.
-   Precision describes how close estimates are to one another.
-   The accuracy of an estimate cannot be improved through calculation.
-   Calibration is a technique used to standardize a measuring
    instrument and increase the accuracy of measurements.
-   Estimation, as used in measurement, is the process of referencing a
    physical quantity in terms of a calibration or reference point. All
    measurement devices have reference marks of some kind.
-   All measurements have an associated uncertainty. It is expressed as
    one-half of the smallest difference between calibration marks. It
    can also be expressed as a percent.
-   Percent error is an expression of the accuracy of a measurement,
    standardized to how large the measurement is.
-   Sources of error can originate from observation errors, methods or
    procedural errors, as well as errors associated with object that
    are measured. They can also originate from the measurement
    instrument itself.
-   Significant figures are figures associated with uncertainty of
    a measurement.
-   Density is an expression of the mass of substance in terms of the
    volume occupied by the substance.
-   Density is typically reported in terms of grams/mL (g/mL) or grams
    per cubic centimeter (g/cm ^3^ ).
-   If a solid is irregularly shaped, we can determine its volume by
    measuring the volume of water that the solid displaces.
-   There are three temperature scales that are commonly used. Their
    units are °F (degrees Fahrenheit), °C (degrees Celsius), and
    K (Kelvin).

## Lesson Review Questions {#3.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-klc}

Make an estimate of the length that is shown in **Figure**
[below](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtMDItcnVsZXI.) and use this
information to answer the following questions.

<div id="3.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-1gp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_3_files/20151009235145302082.png)

**Figure 3.9**

</div>

1.  If the length in **Figure**
    [above](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtMDItcnVsZXI.) were estimated to
    be 11.65 cm ± 0.05, what would be the range of values that fall
    within the acceptable uncertainty for this instrument?
2.  Which of the following length estimates would be accurate for
    **Figure** [above](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtMDItcnVsZXI.) ?
    1.  11.59
    2.  11.71
    3.  11.64
    4.  12

3.  Which of the following length estimates would be precise for the
    **Figure** [above](#3.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDMtMDItcnVsZXI.) ?
    1.  11.64, 11.65, 11.65
    2.  11.60. 11.56, 11.45
    3.  10.9, 12.2, 12
    4.  11, 11.23, 11.234

4.  A student measures the density of gold and finds it to be 18.3 g/mL.
    The accepted value from the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics is
    19.3 g/mL (Lide 1992-1993). What is the percent error of the
    student’s results?
5.  How would you report 40.889 m ^3^ to three significant figures using
    scientific notation?
6.  Complete the **Table**
    [below](#3.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGVtcGVyYXR1cmVfRXhhbXBsZV9wcm9ibGVt) .

                     °F                 °C                 K
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  A                  57                                    
  B                                     37                 
  C                  -40                                   

7.  What is the average mass of three objects whose individual masses
    are 10.3 g, 9.334 g, and 9.25 g?
8.  Complete the following calculation and report the answer with the
    correct number of significant figures: (1.68)(7.874)(1.0000/55.85).
9.  Solve the following equation for n and report the answer with the
    correct number of significant figures: (11.2/760.0)(123.4)
    = n(0.0821)(298.3)

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#3.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-dtk}

-   Robinson, A. (2007). The Story of Measurement. New York: Thames
    and Hudson.
-   Mass of snowflake approximation:
    [http://hypertextbook.com/facts/2001/JudyMoy.shtml](JudyMoy.shtml)
-   Uncertainty of Volumetric Glassware:
    [http://www.wellesley.edu/Chemistry/Chem105manual/Appendices/uncertainty\_volumetric.html](uncertainty_volumetric.html)
-   Online Temperature Converter:
    [http://www.onlineconversion.com/temperature.htm](temperature.htm)
-   Lide, D. R. (Ed.). (1992-1993). CRC Handbook of Chemistry and
    Physics (73rd ed.). Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, Inc.

## Points to Consider {#3.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-xvd}

-   Compare and contrast the differences between a number and a
    measurement? What would be an example of a number and an example of
    a measurement?
-   One way to remember the formula for density, as well as how to
    rearrange variables within the density equation is with the
    following formula triangle

<dl id="x-ck12-OThlZDYwZGIxYzVmMTMzNTlmYjYxMDYwYTljOThlNDk.-a5a">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OThlZDYwZGIxYzVmMTMzNTlmYjYxMDYwYTljOThlNDk.-jeh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OThlZDYwZGIxYzVmMTMzNTlmYjYxMDYwYTljOThlNDk.-wpt">
<dd>
<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_3_files/20151009235145406043.png) </span>

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
-   In this lesson we have seen that all measurements have an
    associated uncertainty. Yet, this does not imply there are flaws in
    the process of measurement. How might you explain to someone the
    concept of uncertainty, and how reconciling uncertainty in
    measurement actually makes the estimate more trustworthy, not less?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686088] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#3.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-4jy}

1.  Zachary Wilson and Laura Guerin. [CK-12
    Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
2.  Courtesy of NASA/SDO.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The\_Sun\_by\_the\_Atmospheric\_Imaging\_Assembly\_of\_NASA%27s\_Solar\_Dynamics\_Observatory\_-\_20100819.jpg](File:The_Sun_by_the_Atmospheric_Imaging_Assembly_of_NASA%27s_Solar_Dynamics_Observatory_-_20100819.jpg) .
    Public Domain
3.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK12 Foundation](CK12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
4.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK12 Foundation](CK12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
5.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
6.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK12 Foundation](CK12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
7.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
8.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
9.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0

<span id="4.html"></span>

# Atomic Structure {#4.html#x-ck12-QXRvbWljIFN0cnVjdHVyZQ..-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150140948.png) </span>

The concept of the atom was first proposed roughly two thousand years
ago by the Greek philosopher Democritus. He argued that matter was
finite and comprised of particles that are indivisible. Like all the
philosophers of his time, Democritus based his argument on reason, not
experimental data. In more recent years, the composition of matter has
been studied further, and only within the last century was it determined
that the atom is indeed divisible. Today, scientists believe that even
some subatomic particles can theoretically be divided even further. The
figure above illustrates our modern model of the atom. At the center is
a nucleus containing protons and neutrons. Around the nucleus are much
lighter particles called electrons. The atom is largely comprised of
empty space. Can you think of how we might go about studying the
behavior of matter at the atomic and subatomic level? How do you suppose
we might study aspects of matter that cannot be directly observed? These
are the questions that philosophers and scientists have pondered for
millennia. We will address some of these questions as we attempt to
further understand the particles that make up matter.

^Iimage\\ copyright\\ Anita\\ Ponne,\\ 2014.\\ www.shutterstock.com.\\ Used\\ under\\ license\\ from\\ Shutterstock.com.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686090] -->

# Evolution of the Atomic Model {#4.html#x-ck12-RXZvbHV0aW9uIG9mIHRoZSBBdG9taWMgTW9kZWw.}

## Lesson Objectives {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-ab7}

-   Describe the development of the concept of the atom from Democritus
    to the modern day.
-   Compare and contrast the continuous and discontinuous theories
    of matter.
-   State the law of conservation of mass, the law of definite
    proportions, and the law of multiple proportions.
-   Summarize the five essential points of Dalton’s atomic theory.
-   Describe the relationship between Dalton’s atomic theory and the law
    of conservation of mass, the law of definite proportions, and the
    law of multiple proportions.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-qgp}

-   **continuous theory of matter** : The concept that matter is
    continuous, infinite, and comes in every form all around us, and
    could be divided and subdivided into smaller and smaller pieces
    without limit.
-   **discontinuous theory of matter** : The concept that matter is
    actually finite and not limitless.
-   **atom** : Fundamental, indivisible particles that make up matter.
-   **law of definite proportions** : States that chemical compounds
    always contain the same proportion of elements by mass, regardless
    of amount.
-   **law of conservation of mass** : States that the mass of a reactant
    must equal the mass of the product for any chemical process.
-   **law of multiple proportions** : States that if two elements form
    more than one compound between them, then the ratios of the masses
    of the second element that combine with a fixed mass of the first
    element will be ratios of small whole numbers.

## Check Your Understanding {#4.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-nt2}

-   What are the general properties of matter? For example, what are the
    properties of water that distinguish it from other substances?
-   We widely accept that all matter is comprised of similar kinds of
    particles that are too small to detect with the unaided eye. We know
    that when a candle burns it gives off carbon dioxide and water
    vapor, but we cannot actually “see” these gases. How can we study
    something that we cannot directly see? Can you give an example?

## Introduction {#4.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-e69}

For centuries, humans have been fascinated with the behavior of matter.
They have recognized that certain things, like candles, burn while other
things, such as metals, do not readily burn. Humans have noticed that
certain substances react with one another. For instance, iron will rust
over time in the presence of air or water. Similarly, they have
recognized that some matter is not visible, such as the air that we
breathe, but it is still there. Early philosophers believed that matter
was comprised of four fundamental substances: earth, air, fire, and
water. These became known as elements. Later, philosophers postulated
that all matter was comprised of a fundamental particle, the atom, which
was indivisible. We now know that the atom is comprised of even smaller
subatomic particles that display unique behaviors. In this chapter, we
will look at how our understanding of the atom has evolved over time.

## Discontinuous Theory of Matter {#4.html#x-ck12-RGlzY29udGludW91cyBUaGVvcnkgb2YgTWF0dGVy-lft}

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-YjM5ZDAwMWQ5Zjg2MzRhOTg0NzIxN2FmY2Y0MTUxYzA.-wfr"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Raphael" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanzio_01_Plato_Aristotle.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150285396.jpeg)

**Figure 4.1**

Aristotle and Plato.

</div>

Our understanding of matter today is much different than it was long
ago. In 440 BC, Aristotle and Plato ( **Figure**
[above](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fNF8y) ) proposed that matter was
continuous, infinite, present in every form, and always all around us.
It was thought that matter could be divided and subdivided into smaller
and smaller pieces without limit. This concept was called the
**continuous theory of matter** . One debate of the time revolved around
how far a grain of sand could be divided. Most philosophers of the time
believed that the sand could be sub-divided indefinitely. These were
logical interpretations of their observations about the natural world.

In 400 BC, Democritus ( **Figure** [below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fNF8z)
) proposed an alternate view, referred to as the **discontinuous theory
of matter** . He expanded upon the work of Leucippus, a mentor of his,
who believed matter was actually finite and not limitless. Democritus
held that a grain of sand could only be divided a finite number of
times. However, this idea was not well-received at the time. Aristotle,
who was considered a greater “authority,” taught against it and
influenced other philosophers to reject the ideas of Democritus. It
would be thousands of years before his ideas were revisited and found to
be consistent with more recently available scientific evidence.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-ZDlhZjA0MmI1ZjFlYTQzM2E4N2FkMDdhYjcwMWIyNDI.-eak"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Hendrick Bloemaert" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hendrick_Bloemaert_Democritus.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150432256.jpeg)

**Figure 4.2**

Democritus

</div>

Democritus proposed that all matter is composed of fundamental,
indivisible particles that he called **atoms** . The essential ideas
behind his theory are the following:

1.  Everything is composed of “atoms,” which are physically indivisible.
2.  Atoms are indestructible and constantly in motion.
3.  There is empty space between atoms.

## Proust’s Law of Definite Proportions {#4.html#x-ck12-UHJvdXN04oCZcyBMYXcgb2YgRGVmaW5pdGUgUHJvcG9ydGlvbnM.-cei}

The French scientist Joseph Louis Proust (1754-1826) studied chemical
compounds and their mass proportions. Through his experiments, Proust
found chemical compounds always contain the same proportion of elements
by mass, no matter the amount. Based off of this idea, Proust developed
the **law of definite proportions** which was published in 1799. To
illustrate this, suppose compound AB is made of element A and element B.
Regardless of how much AB is present, the ratio between the mass of A
and the mass of B will be the same for any sample. In other words,
elements combine in fixed ratios based on their mass. Water, H ~2~ O, is
always 1/9 by mass hydrogen and 8/9 by mass oxygen, regardless of
whether we are looking at one drop or an entire lake.

## Lavoisier’s Law of Conservation of Mass {#4.html#x-ck12-TGF2b2lzaWVy4oCZcyBMYXcgb2YgQ29uc2VydmF0aW9uIG9mIE1hc3M.-wfo}

At the same time, another French scientist named Antoine Lavoisier was
studying mass relations in chemical reactions. He noticed that for an
isolated system, the mass of the reactants must equal the mass of the
products for any chemical process. This discovery was later called the
**law of conservation of mass** . This law greatly influenced chemistry
because it quantified gaseous chemical species, which were often viewed
as “missing matter” that was not involved in chemical processes.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-ZjU1ODU2OTIyOTU5ZTExOTBlMjg1MWMyMGYyOGI0ZjQ.-cqy"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joseph Allen" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:John_Dalton.jpeg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150538328.jpeg)

**Figure 4.3**

John Dalton

</div>

While it must be assumed that many more scientists, philosophers and
others studied the composition of matter after Democritus, a major leap
forward in our understanding of the composition of matter took place in
the 1800s with the work of John Dalton ( **Figure**
[above](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tNC01) ). John Dalton, a school teacher
from England, studied the weights of various elements and compounds. He
noticed that matter always combined in fixed ratios based on weight (and
volume, in the case of gases). Chemical compounds always contain the
same proportion of elements by mass, regardless of amount, which
provided further support for Proust’s law of definite proportions.
Dalton also observed that there was more than one mass ratio in which
two elements could combine.

  CO and CO ~2~           NO ~3~ and N ~2~ O ~3~ NO ~3~ and N ~2~ O ~2~
  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  FeCl ~2~ and FeCl ~3~   N ~2~ O ~3~ and N ~2~ O ~4~

  :  Combining Ratios in Elements in Compounds

Notice in **Table** [above](#4.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6NC4x) that the
elements combine in different but predictable ratios with other
elements. Carbon can combine in a 1:1 ratio with oxygen to form carbon
monoxide – a poisonous gas. Change the ratio to 1:2 carbon to oxygen,
and you get carbon dioxide, which is a gas that we exhale. His work led
to the development of the **law of multiple proportions** . This law
states that if two elements form more than one compound between them,
then the ratios of the masses of the second element that combine with a
fixed mass of the first element will be ratios of small whole numbers.

## Dalton’s Atomic Theory (1804) {#4.html#x-ck12-RGFsdG9u4oCZcyBBdG9taWMgVGhlb3J5ICgxODA0KQ..-w2j}

From his experiments and observations, as well as the work of
contemporary scientists, Dalton proposed a new theory of the atom. This
later became known as Dalton’s atomic theory. The general tenets of this
theory were as follows:

1.  All matter is composed of extremely small particles called atoms.
2.  Atoms of a given element are identical in size, mass, and
    other properties. Atoms of different elements differ in size, mass,
    and other properties.
3.  Atoms cannot be subdivided, created, or destroyed.
4.  Atoms of different elements can combine in simple whole number
    ratios to form chemical compounds.
5.  In chemical reactions, atoms are combined, separated, or rearranged.

Dalton’s atomic theory has been largely accepted by the scientific
community, although a couple of modifications have been made since its
conception. We know now that (1) an atom can be further sub-divided, and
(2) not all atoms of an element have identical masses.

## Lesson Summary {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-a2l}

-   Early Greek philosophers thought that matter could be divided and
    subdivided into smaller and smaller pieces without limit.
-   In 400 BC, Democritus proposed that there was a point at which
    matter could no longer be divided any further. He suggested that all
    matter was composed of tiny indivisible particles, which he
    called atoms.
-   Joseph Proust found that compounds always contain the same
    proportion of elements by mass, regardless of amount. This was later
    called the law of definite proportions.
-   Antoine Lavoisier proposed the law of conservation of mass, which
    states that in a chemical reaction mass is not created
    nor destroyed.
-   John Dalton discovered that certain combinations of elements could
    combine in multiple ratios. This was called the law of
    multiple proportions.
-   In 1804, John Dalton proposed a modern atomic theory. This theory is
    still largely accepted by the scientific community, with a
    couple modifications.

## Lesson Review Questions {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-90z}

1.  Compare and contrast the continuous theory of matter with the
    discontinuous theory of matter.
2.  Which of the following did Proust discover?
    1.  Elements combine in unpredictable ratios with other elements.
    2.  The mass of an element is always changing even when combined
        with another element.
    3.  Chemical compounds always contain the same proportion of
        elements by mass, regardless of amount.
    4.  Elements combine only in fixed ratios based on volume, but
        not mass.

3.  Which of the following did Lavoisier discover?
    1.  When matter reacts, there is a small portion that is lost and
        unaccounted for.
    2.  For an isolated system, the mass of the reactants must equal the
        mass of the products.
    3.  When matter reacts, there can be mass that comes from nowhere
        and is unaccounted for.
    4.  Mass cannot be accurately accounted for in chemical processes.

4.  What did John Dalton discover about chemical compounds? How did his
    theory differ from Proust's?
5.  Summarize Dalton’s atomic theory.
6.  What were two points made by Dalton’s atomic theory that are no
    longer considered correct?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#4.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-adl}

-   Kotz, John, and Heith Purcell. 1991. Chemistry &
    Chemical Reactivity. Orlando, FL: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
-   Partington, J. R. 1989. A Short History of Chemistry. 3 ed. New
    York: Macmillan. Reissued by Dover Publications.

## Points to Consider {#4.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-jd3}

-   In this lesson, we discussed the early evolution of theories about
    the atom. More recent evidence has shown that the atom is comprised
    of subatomic particles that exhibit unique properties and affect the
    overall behavior of an atom. In our next lesson, we will look at
    subatomic particles, including how they were discovered and how
    they behave.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686090] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686091] -->

# Structure of the Atom {#4.html#x-ck12-U3RydWN0dXJlIG9mIHRoZSBBdG9t}

## Lesson Objectives {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-qqs}

-   Describe the properties of cathode rays that led to the discovery of
    the electron.
-   Describe the experiment carried out by Rutherford and his co-workers
    that led to the discovery of the nucleus.
-   List the properties of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
-   Describe the properties of X-rays and how they were discovered.
-   Describe the currently accepted model of the atom.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-lwp}

-   **electron** : A negatively charged particle that has a very small
    mass compared to the mass of other subatomic particles and surrounds
    the atom.
-   **plum pudding model** : An experiment, led by J.J. Thomson, which
    proposed that the atom was comprised of negatively charged particles
    in a disperse field of positively charged particles.
-   **radioactivity** : When certain substances emit charged particles.
-   **gold foil experiment** : An experiment, led by Ernest Rutherford,
    which proposed that atoms consist of a small positively charged
    nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons.
-   **proton** : A positively charged particle that has a relatively
    large mass compared to electrons. Protons can be found in the
    nucleus of the atom.
-   **neutron** : An uncharged particle with a mass nearly equal to that
    of the proton. Neutrons can be found in the nucleus of the atom.

## Check Your Understanding {#4.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-l03}

-   Describe Dalton’s atomic theory.
-   List two changes that were made to Dalton's theory based on more
    recent evidence.

## Introduction {#4.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-2in}

After the development of Dalton’s atomic theory, several important
discoveries were made that led to a new understanding of the atom. A
number of experiments revealed that the atom is comprised of subatomic
particles called electrons, neutrons, and protons. Most of the atom's
mass is concentrated in a central nucleus, which contains protons and
neutrons. The nucleus is surrounded by much less massive electrons,
which account for most of the volume occupied by the atom. The electron
was the first subatomic particle to be discovered, followed by
discoveries of the nucleus, the proton, and the neutron. In this lesson,
we are going to study these important discoveries and how they led to
our current understanding of the atom.

## Discovery of Cathode Rays {#4.html#x-ck12-RGlzY292ZXJ5IG9mIENhdGhvZGUgUmF5cw.._1-hvs}

In 1877, William Crookes (1832-1919) was studying how electrical current
behaves in a vacuum tube. In one experiment, he passed an electric
current through an evacuated phosphorous-coated glass cylinder with an
object in the center, as shown in **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fNF82LUNyb29rZXMtdHViZS1kaWFncmFt) .

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NzZiMGZlMzNlNjk4YjNjNWZkYTM1MjhlOGJjNzEwZWQ.-956"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Chetvornoa/Wikipedia and User:Drondent/Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Crookes_tube2_diagram.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150655369.png)

**Figure 4.4**

Diagram of Crookes tube.

</div>

Upon passing a current through the tube, Crookes noticed that a “shadow”
was cast by the object in the tube. The phosphorus on the terminal end
of the tube became brightly fluorescent, except for the region directly
behind the central object. He interpreted this to mean that the
electrical current was blocked by the object. He reasoned that the
electrical current, which he later called cathode rays, was composed of
streams of particles. Crookes’s work was later expanded upon by several
other scientists. One scientist in particular, J. J. Thomson, was able
to show that cathode rays could be deflected by a magnetic field, as
shown in the following video:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M1REuKMeI34](watch?v=M1REuKMeI34)
(0:58).

[![](ck12_4_files/tmpr1ty5s.jpeg)](M1REuKMeI34%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D926edee3a30ab2f72874bd3c311803e4)

Click on the image above for more content

Thomson’s interpretation of this effect was that cathode rays must
consist of charged particles that have mass. Thomson presented his work
in 1897, where he referred to these negatively charged particles as
corpuscles. Later on, this name was changed and negatively charged
particles became known as **electrons** . Thomson revised the model of
the atom into what became known as the **plum pudding model** . He
hypothesized that the atom was comprised of negatively charged particles
in a field of positive charge (positively charged particles had not yet
been discovered). This proposed arrangement was compared to the
arrangement of plums in plum pudding, as illustrated in **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fNF84LVBsdW0tcHVkZGluZw..) .

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NGRkNjA4N2QzNjA2ODY4ZTA3YjBiNjM3MmUzODVlZTY.-lik"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plum_pudding_atom.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150779028.png)

**Figure 4.5**

Plum pudding model of the atom.

</div>

## The Charge of the Electron {#4.html#x-ck12-VGhlIENoYXJnZSBvZiB0aGUgRWxlY3Ryb24._1-qbe}

In 1909, Robert Millikan and Harvey Fletcher devised what is known as
the oil drop experiment to determine the charge of a single electron.
The oil drop experiment consisted of an apparatus in which small,
charged oil drops were passed through an electric field. The electric
field was created by two oppositely charged parallel metal plates. The
rate at which the oil drops fell through the field was used to determine
the magnitude of the charge of an electron.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NTI4M2Y4OTA4NzFhYTk5Yjg4NDdlZjliODdiMTlmY2Q.-tm5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235150915007.png)

**Figure 4.6**

Millikan's oil drop experiment.

</div>

The following video illustrates this experiment and explains how the
charge of an electron was determined:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XMfYHag7Liw](watch?v=XMfYHag7Liw)
(1:14).

[![](ck12_4_files/tmpShKDU8.jpeg)](XMfYHag7Liw%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3Dc56f7383e0a8099044ba3f71a7c9fea8)

Click on the image above for more content

Using this information, Millikan calculated the charge of an electron to
be 1.5924 × 10 ^−19^ coulombs. A coulomb (C) is the SI unit for electric
charge, where 1 coulomb = 1 ampere × 1 second. (Remember, an ampere is
an SI base unit for electric current.) Today, the accepted value for the
charge of an electron is 1.602176487 × 10 ^−19^ C. Despite the
relatively simple apparatus with which it was determined, Millikan’s
value was within 1% of the currently accepted value. Combining this
value with information from J. J. Thomson's experiments, Millikan was
also able to calculate the mass of an electron. The currently accepted
value is 9.10938215 × 10 ^-31^ kg.

## Discovery of the X-ray {#4.html#x-ck12-RGlzY292ZXJ5IG9mIHRoZSBYLXJheQ.._1-m4z}

Right around the time that Thomson was formulating his model of the
atom, a scientist named Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen was studying the
behavior of electricity in discharge tubes. These were partially
evacuated gas-filled tubes which would conduct an electric current,
similar to the Crookes tube used in the cathode ray experiments. He
devised an experiment in which he covered a discharge tube with black
cardboard, and several feet away, he placed a sheet of paper that had
been chemically treated with a compound called barium-platinum cyanide.
When he applied voltage to the discharge tube, he noticed the screen
several feet away became fluorescent, emitting light. This was peculiar,
because the tube had been completely covered by material that would
block the escape of any cathode rays. Roentgen continued to explore this
phenomenon. He moved the screen further away, he turned the screen
around, and he placed objects between the screen and the discharge tube.
In all cases, the screen still fluoresced when the discharge tube was
turned on. Then Roentgen had his wife place her hand atop a photographic
plate, and the rays were shone towards the plate. After developing the
plate, he observed an image of his wife's hand that “showed the shadows
thrown by the bones of her hand and that of a ring she was wearing”
(Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen - Biography). **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fNF8xMF9Sb2VudGdlbi1oYW5kLXgtcmF5) is an
image of what he saw.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NGZjZTVmYzIxYmY5NGVjMzZjOWMxY2ZkNjVhODAzZDc.-p09"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of NASA" -->
<!-- @@url="http://imagine.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/science/know_l1/history1_xray.html" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151019258.jpeg)

**Figure 4.7**

The skeleton of Roentgen's wife's hand, as captured on the photographic
plate. What do you think the dark spot in the picture might be caused
by?

</div>

This was the first “roentgenogram” ever taken. He interpreted this to
mean that another ray, other than the cathode rays, was being produced
that could penetrate and travel through objects at a distance. He called
these X-rays, and he received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901 for his
brilliant work. Modern day X-rays that one might receive for a medical
exam operate on the same principles that Roentgen discovered. Several
major discoveries followed shortly after Roentgen’s discovery of X-rays.
Just two months later, in 1896, **radioactivity** was discovered by a
Frenchman named Henri Becquerel. Becquerel discovered that certain
substances, like uranium salts, emit charged particles. Following this
work, Marie and Pierre Curie began to study the behavior of various
radioactive substances in 1897. In fact, Madame Curie coined the word
“radioactivity.” Their work resulted in the discovery of mass changes in
radioactive elements, which later became known as radioactive decay.
They also identified two new radioactive elements, which later became
known as polonium and radium. The Curies were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1903 for their work. Marie Curie later won a Nobel Prize in
Chemistry (1911) for her contributions to our understanding of
radioactivity. We will study radioactivity further in the chapter
*Nuclear Chemistry.*

## Discovery of the Nucleus {#4.html#x-ck12-RGlzY292ZXJ5IG9mIHRoZSBOdWNsZXVz_1-xdv}

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-OWExNjAyOTQxZmVmOTViMDE2OTczM2M2MGZjYjExNmE.-pvr"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ernest_Rutherford.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151128478.jpeg)

**Figure 4.8**

Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937).

</div>

By 1900, it was known that the electron carried a negative charge. It
was also known that the electron makes up an extremely small fraction of
the mass of an atom. Ernest Rutherford set out to determine how the
remainder of the mass and charge was distributed in the atom. Rutherford
was a physicist from New Zealand who was working under the direction of
J. J. Thomson. He conducted several experiments on the radioactive
properties of uranium. He discovered that uranium released two different
types of particles, which he referred to as alpha (α) particles, which
were positively charged, and beta (β) particles, which were negatively
charged. It was later shown that beta particles were simply free
electrons.

### Gold Foil Experiment {#4.html#x-ck12-R29sZCBGb2lsIEV4cGVyaW1lbnQ._1-xpj}

One of Rutherford’s famous experiments was called the **gold foil
experiment** (illustrated in the **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDQtMTItUnV0aGVyZm9yZC1leHBlcmltZW50YWwtc2V0dXA.)
). In this experiment, Rutherford used a radioactive source to direct
alpha particles toward a very thin sheet of gold foil. Surrounding the
foil was a screen that fluoresced when struck by the alpha particles.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NTgzN2IyYjUzMmVhZWVmZmE3NTE5OGY0OWE4MTI0MTQ.-5le"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151233517.png)

**Figure 4.9**

Rutherford's gold foil experiment.

</div>

Here is a short video of his experiment:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pZj0u\_XMbc](watch?v=5pZj0u_XMbc)
(0:47).

[![](ck12_4_files/tmp8BwA6o.jpeg)](5pZj0u_XMbc)

Click on the image above for more content

As shown in the video, most alpha particles easily passed through the
gold foil and struck the fluorescent screen behind the foil. However,
there were some instances in which the alpha particles were deflected
very strongly, often back toward the emission source. If the plum
pudding model were correct, all of the alpha particles would be expected
to pass through the gold foil with little or no deflection. The strong
deflection experienced by a small portion of the alpha particles could
be better explained by an atom that contained a very small, dense
**nucleus** . Because some of the alpha particles emitted from the
source were repelled by the nucleus, Rutherford concluded that the
nucleus must be made up of these positively charged alpha particles,
which he named **protons** . He proposed that atoms consist of a small,
positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons,
as shown in the **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDQtMTMtUnV0aGVyZm9yZC1tb2RlbA..) .

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-MzJjNGNjYTU1Yzg5NWNmYTA2OTNiZmMzYjMyNDFhNTY.-l3u"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151354119.png)

**Figure 4.10**

Rutherford's atomic model.

</div>

### Bohr's Atomic Model {#4.html#x-ck12-Qm9ocidzIEF0b21pYyBNb2RlbA.._1-e5a}

In 1913, shortly after Rutherford’s work on the nucleus, Niels Bohr
proposed what became known as a planetary model of the atom. Bohr’s
model was based upon the work done by Max Planck and Albert Einstein,
who at the time were studying quantum theory which looks at the energy
associated with matter. The planetary model was useful for relating
atomic structure to the wavelengths of light that an element emits when
heated. Bohr’s model, as well as the work of Planck and Einstein, will
be discussed in the chapter *Electrons in Atoms* .

### Discovery of the Neutron (1932) {#4.html#x-ck12-RGlzY292ZXJ5IG9mIHRoZSBOZXV0cm9uICgxOTMyKQ.._1-rnx}

In 1932, James Chadwick discovered the neutron. Chadwick was an English
physicist who was mentored by Rutherford. His experiment consisted of
bombarding beryllium atoms with alpha particles through a paraffin wax
target and studying the effects. From his analysis, he concluded that
the nucleus also contains a particle which has equal mass to the proton,
but unlike the proton, is electrically neutral - hence the name
**neutron** . Here is a short video clip describing Chadwick’s
experiment:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HnmEI94URK8](watch?v=HnmEI94URK8)
(2:14).

[![](ck12_4_files/tmp4xY89b.jpeg)](HnmEI94URK8%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D32b2f1ea6e49b98e6ac0166345def547)

Click on the image above for more content

Chadwick’s work resulted in a new understanding of the nucleus of the
atom; it is comprised of both protons and neutrons. Because the masses
of subatomic particles are so small, a new unit, called an atomic mass
unit (amu), was defined. Protons and neutrons each have a mass of
approximately one amu. The **Table**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6NC4y) describes the characteristics of
the three subatomic particles we have discussed.

  **Particle**        **Charge (C)**                                                                            **Mass (kg)**                                                                             **Mass (amu)**                                                                                **Location**
  ------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
  proton              ![+1.6022 \\times 10\^{-19}](ck12_math_images_dir/82ecf9f958621966969c9487235709c9.png)   ![1.67262 \\times 10\^{-27}](ck12_math_images_dir/a770276d805377f0cbd9dcd6bdc57f7d.png)   ![1.0073](ck12_math_images_dir/66026d402af84755837872a8ae75c9f0.png) (\~1)                    nucleus
  electron (e ^-^ )   ![-1.6022 \\times 10\^{-19}](ck12_math_images_dir/0bb236b591428ef6af9141ddef77cf75.png)   ![9.10938 \\times 10\^{-31}](ck12_math_images_dir/78e7fe04758ecd4c7ad7c4852264037a.png)   ![5.4858 \\times 10\^{-4}](ck12_math_images_dir/ebf8bf474e41045f2a0e6dd9e853fa45.png) (\~0)   outside nucleus
  neutron             0                                                                                         ![1.67493 \\times 10\^{-27}](ck12_math_images_dir/c187c3587bef3b7096645d56f6c864cc.png)   ![1.0087](ck12_math_images_dir/1a6aae608347fc6f5109f39f3d8a4689.png) (\~1)                    nucleus

## Lesson Summary {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-jex}

-   Experiments conducted during the early twentieth century revealed
    that the atom is comprised of subatomic particles called electrons,
    neutrons, and protons.
-   In 1877, William Crookes discovered cathode rays, which later became
    known as electrons. Crookes discovered these rays using an apparatus
    he developed called the Crookes tube or cathode-ray tube.
-   Electrons, which were initially called cathode rays, are negatively
    charged and have a very small mass compared to the masses of other
    subatomic particles.
-   In 1895, Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen discovered X-rays.
-   In 1897, J. J. Thomson showed that cathode rays are deflected in a
    magnetic field and proposed that cathode rays are streams of
    negatively charged particles. Thomson proposed the plum-pudding
    model of the atom. This model described the atom as a disperse field
    of positive charge containing small negatively charged particles.
-   In 1909, the magnitude of the charge carried by an electron was
    determined by Robert Millikan in an experiment known as the oil
    drop experiment. Information from this experiment was later used to
    also calculate the mass of an electron.
-   In 1919, Rutherford discovered the presence of a positively charged
    nucleus with his famous gold foil experiment.
-   Rutherford proposed a new atomic model that described the atom as
    comprised of a positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively
    charged electrons. In this model, most of the atom was thought to be
    empty space.\*Protons are positively charged and have a relatively
    large mass compared to electrons. Protons can be found in the
    nucleus of the atom.
-   In 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron, a particle with a mass
    similar to that of the proton but without any electrical charge.
-   Neutrons are particles with a mass similar to that of the proton,
    but they have no electrical charge. Neutrons also reside in
    the nucleus.

## Lesson Review Questions {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-tsv}

1.  What did Crookes discover in his cathode ray tube experiments?
2.  Describe the atom using Thomson's plum pudding model. Draw a picture
    of this model.
3.  How did Millikan set up his oil drop experiment?
4.  Describe how Roentgen took his first x-ray.
5.  How did Rutherford's gold foil experiment contradict the plum
    pudding model of the atom?
6.  What is the modern view of the nucleus and its composition?
7.  Sketch a modern view of the atom indicating the locations of
    protons, neutrons, and electrons.
8.  List the properties of electrons, neutrons, and protons.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#4.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-hgp}

-   The History of the Discovery of Radiation and Radioactivity:
    [http://mightylib.mit.edu/Course%20Materials/22.01/Fall%202001/discovery%20of%20radiation.pdf](discovery%20of%20radiation.pdf)
-   Biography of Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen:
    [http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/physics/laureates/1901/rontgen-bio.html](rontgen-bio.html)
-   Radioactivity:
    [http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/nuclear/radact.html](radact.html)
-   Bievre, P. de, and H. S. Peiser. 1992. 'Atomic weight': The name,
    its history, definition, and units. Pure and Applied Chemistry
    64 (10):1535-1543.
-   Kotz, John, and Heith Purcell. 1991. Chemistry &
    Chemical Reactivity. Orlando, FL: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
-   Partington, J. R. 1989. A Short History of Chemistry. 3 ed. New
    York: Macmillan. Reissued by Dover Publications.

## Points to Consider {#4.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-254}

-   In this lesson we learned that neutrons and protons in the nucleus
    have similar mass. How might we measure the amount of mass contained
    in different elements?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686091] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686092] -->

# Isotopes and Atomic Mass {#4.html#x-ck12-SXNvdG9wZXMgYW5kIEF0b21pYyBNYXNz}

## Lesson Objectives {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-2sp}

-   Explain the workings of a mass spectrometer and describe how this
    device is used to determine average atomic mass.
-   Define atomic number and mass number.
-   Define isotope.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-cp7}

-   **atomic number** : The number of protons in the nucleus of each
    atom of an element.
-   **mass number** : The total number of protons and neutrons in
    an atom.
-   **A-Z notation** : The shorthand notation of the composition of any
    atom using the atomic number (Z) and the mass number (A).
-   **isotopes** : Atoms that have the same atomic number but different
    mass numbers due to a difference in the number of neutrons.
-   **mass spectrometer** : An instrument that determines the masses of
    atoms, molecules, and molecular fragments.
-   **percent abundance** : The percentage of atoms of a particular
    isotope in a naturally occurring sample of the pure element.
-   **atomic mass** : The weighted average of the atomic masses of the
    naturally occurring isotopes of an element.

## Check Your Understanding {#4.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-8wl}

-   Describe the composition of an atom.
-   What are the three subatomic particles and what are their
    properties?

## Introduction {#4.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-j1n}

Atoms are the fundamental building blocks of all matter and are composed
of protons, neutrons, and electrons. Because atoms are electrically
neutral, the number of positively charged protons must be equal to the
number of negatively charged electrons. One of Dalton’s points in his
atomic theory was that all atoms of a given element are identical in
mass. In this section, we will see how this is not strictly true, due to
variability in the number of neutrons that an atom may contain.

## Atomic Number {#4.html#x-ck12-QXRvbWljIE51bWJlcg.._2-whu}

The **atomic number** of an element is the number of protons in the
nucleus of each atom of that element. An atom can be classified as a
particular element based solely on its atomic number. For example, any
atom with an atomic number of 8 (its nucleus contains 8 protons) is an
oxygen atom, and any atom with a different number of protons would be a
different element. The periodic table ( **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDQtMTItUGVyaW9kaWMtdGFibGU.) ) displays
all of the known elements and is arranged in order of increasing atomic
number. In this table, an element’s atomic number is indicated above the
elemental symbol. Hydrogen, at the upper left of the table, has an
atomic number of 1. Every hydrogen atom has one proton in its nucleus.
Next on the table is helium, whose atoms have two protons in the
nucleus. Lithium atoms have three protons, beryllium atoms have four,
and so on. Since atoms are neutral, the number of electrons in an atom
is equal to the number of protons. Therefore, hydrogen atoms all have
one electron occupying the space outside of the nucleus.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NzU5MGM5MDMwNDFiMTQ2ZmJmM2E4NTZjNjA0ZmVkMzk.-qef"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151463307.png)

**Figure 4.11**

The periodic table of the elements.

</div>

## Mass Number {#4.html#x-ck12-TWFzcyBOdW1iZXI._2-6in}

Rutherford’s experiment showed that the vast majority of the mass of an
atom is concentrated in its nucleus, which is composed of protons and
neutrons. The mass of an electron is very small compared to the mass of
a neutron or proton, so the electrons in an element do not contribute
much to the total mass. The **mass number** is defined as the total
number of protons and neutrons in an atom. Remember that both protons
and neutrons have a mass of approximately 1 amu. Knowing the mass number
and the atomic number of an atom therefore allows you to determine the
number of neutrons present in that atom by subtraction:

<dl id="x-ck12-MGQwMTc2YTI4MDM1OTkzNTdkODQ5NTIxMWZiNTY3MDY.-nga">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGQwMTc2YTI4MDM1OTkzNTdkODQ5NTIxMWZiNTY3MDY.-iw0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGQwMTc2YTI4MDM1OTkzNTdkODQ5NTIxMWZiNTY3MDY.-wej">
<dd>
Number of neutrons = mass number - atomic number

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The composition of any atom can be illustrated with a shorthand
notation, sometimes called **A-Z notation** , using the atomic number
(Z) and the mass number (A). The general form for this notation is as
follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-9s0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-sfe">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gpo">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{ \^{A}\_{Z}
X}](ck12_math_images_dir/94fcc87cd998206c03653d1987ea7599.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
For example, a chromium atom that has 24 protons and 28 electrons could
be written as:

<dl id="x-ck12-c0s">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-q3a">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hqs">
<dd>
![{}\_{24}\^{52}\\text{Cr}](ck12_math_images_dir/b582cce07e9d7c4bac8fafdedf713b4e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Another way to refer to a specific atom is to write the mass number of
the atom after the name, separated by a hyphen. The above atom would be
written as chromium-52.

## Isotopes {#4.html#x-ck12-SXNvdG9wZXM._2-fys}

As stated earlier, not all atoms of a given element are identical.
Specifically, the number of neutrons in the nucleus can vary for many
elements. As an example, naturally occurring carbon exists in three
forms, which are illustrated in **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDQtMTMtVGhyZWUtY2FyYm9uLWlzb3RvcGVz) .

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-N2FhNDM5N2U0ODAxMzlhNmNiNGE4OTAyYWZmMmE1OTc.-mys"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151595143.png)

**Figure 4.12**

Nuclei of the three isotopes of carbon: Almost 99% of naturally
occurring carbon is carbon-12, whose nucleus consists of six protons and
six neutrons. Carbon-13 and carbon-14, with seven or eight neutrons,
respectively, have a much lower natural abundance.

</div>

Each carbon atom has the same number of protons (6), which is equal to
its atomic number. Each carbon atom also contains six electrons,
allowing the atom to remain electrically neutral. However the number of
neutrons varies from six to eight. **Isotopes** are atoms that have the
same atomic number but different mass numbers due to a change in the
number of neutrons. The three isotopes of carbon can be referred to as
carbon-12 ( ![{}\_{\\
6}\^{12}\\text{C}](ck12_math_images_dir/680f72a608f1c0f80407e43a60ce9c3b.png)
), carbon-13 ( ![{}\_{\\
6}\^{13}\\text{C}](ck12_math_images_dir/c3b810741907126135955021e4f22eb3.png)
), and carbon-14 ( ![{}\_{\\
6}\^{14}\\text{C}](ck12_math_images_dir/79348ca38a969ec5e0d744d7b7654cc3.png)
). Naturally occurring samples of most elements are mixtures of
isotopes. Carbon has only three natural isotopes, but some heavier
elements have many more. Tin has ten stable isotopes, which is the most
of any element. While the presence of isotopes affects the mass of an
atom, it does not affect its chemical reactivity. Chemical behavior is
governed by the number of electrons and the number of protons. Carbon-13
behaves chemically in exactly the same way as the more plentiful
carbon-12.

**Example 4.1**

Silver has two known isotopes, one with 60 neutrons and the other with
62 neutrons. What are the mass numbers and symbols of these isotopes?

## Atomic Mass and the Mass Spectrometer {#4.html#x-ck12-QXRvbWljIE1hc3MgYW5kIHRoZSBNYXNzIFNwZWN0cm9tZXRlcg.._2-znh}

Beginning in the early part of the twentieth century, scientists were
approaching a new understanding of the composition of the atom. Several
major discoveries demonstrated that the atom contained a nucleus, where
protons and neutrons are situated. It was discovered that electrons
surrounded the nucleus and it was later determined that electrons
primarily determine the chemical properties of elements. Several devices
were created during this time which demystified the inner workings of
the atom and the composition of elements. One such device was the **mass
spectrometer** , which was developed in 1918 by Arthur Jeffrey Dempster.
The mass spectrometer is an instrument for determining the masses of
atoms, molecules, and molecular fragments. The **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDQtMTctTWFzcy1zcGVjdHJvbWV0ZXI.)
illustrates a modern mass spectrometer.

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-OTUyOWIzZThhNDdhNjJiNTVmMDgwZDAyZGViYTY3NDk.-jbm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151710170.png)

**Figure 4.13**

An electron is removed from an atom to yield a positive ion (such as H
^+^ , O ^+^ , or N ^+^ ). The ions are then accelerated and deflected by
a magnetic field. The degree of deflection directly relates to the mass
of the ion: the lighter the ion, the greater the deflection and the
heavier the ion, the lesser the deflection. The beam of ions is then
detected and the relative abundance of each isotope of an element can
then be determined.

</div>

If we were to place a sample of carbon into a mass spectrometer and
analyze its mass, we would find that some of the carbon atoms have a
relative mass of 12, while other atoms have a relative mass of 13, and
still others have a relative mass of 14. The mass spectrometer measures
the **percent abundance** of these carbon isotopes. Percent abundance is
the percentage of atoms in a naturally occurring sample of the pure
element that are a particular isotope. We can represent the percent
abundance of carbon with what is known as a mass spectrogram, shown in
the **Figure**
[below](#4.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDQtMTgtQ2FyYm9uLVNwZWN0cm9ncmFwaA..) .

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-NzNjZDcwNDRkYmFhZTY4MmNiYmZlY2FhZDNjMmFlMmM.-wx5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_4_files/20151009235151829736.png)

**Figure 4.14**

Mass spectrogram for carbon.

</div>

The spectrogram reveals the percent abundances of the variants of carbon
atoms consists of 98.9% ^12^ C, 1.1% ^13^ C, and &lt;&lt; 0.1% ^14^ C.
Because we generally deal with very large amounts of atoms, it is more
practically useful to know the average mass of each atom in a large
sample as determined by the percent abundance of each isotope. The
**atomic mass** of an element is the weighted average of the atomic
masses of the naturally occurring isotopes of that element.

**Example 4.2**

Using the percent abundances for each carbon isotope as given above,
calculate the weighted average for the atomic mass of carbon.

*Answer:*

*We calculate average atomic mass by taking the percent abundance of
each isotope and multiplying this by the atomic mass of the isotope.*

^12^ C

0.989 × 12 = 11.868

^13^ C

0.011 × 13 = 0.143

*Then, add these values together to get the relative atomic mass:*

11.868 + 0.143 = 12.011

*Therefore, the average atomic mass of carbon is calculated to be
12.011. This is the same number that is listed on the periodic table.*

## Lesson Summary {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-1ba}

-   The atomic number (Z) of an element is equal to the number of
    protons in its nucleus.
-   The mass number (A) of an element is equal to the sum of the protons
    and the neutrons in its nucleus.
-   Isotopes are atoms of the same element that have a different mass
    number (A) but the same atomic number (Z).
-   Isotopes have the same number of protons and electrons, but a
    different number of neutrons.
-   The mass spectrometer measures the percent abundance of different
    isotopes in a given sample.
-   The average atomic mass of an element can be calculated from the
    atomic mass and percent abundance of each naturally
    occurring isotope.

## Lesson Review Questions {#4.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-c1z}

1.  Describe in general terms how a mass spectrometer functions.
2.  Complete **Table** [below](#4.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6cHJhY3RpY2U.) .

<div id="4.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6cHJhY3RpY2U.">

[![](images/table.png)](table_4-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

3.  What is the mass number of a tin atom that has 69 neutrons? Write
    its full symbol.
4.  How many neutrons are there in an atom of platinum with a mass
    number of 195?
5.  What is the mass number of a copper atom with 34 neutrons?
6.  How many protons, neutrons, and electrons are there in a ![\\mathrm{
    \^{59}\_{28}
    Ni}](ck12_math_images_dir/efa2b3cbcd758093ca05b16d3ce8a6f7.png)
    atom?
7.  Silicon has three isotopes with 14, 15, and 16
    neutrons, respectively. What are the mass numbers and symbols of
    these three isotopes?
8.  A natural sample of boron consists of two isotopes. One has an exact
    mass of 10.0129 amu and its percent abundance is 19.91. The other
    isotope, of mass 11.0093 amu, has a percent abundance of 80.09.
    Calculate the average atomic mass.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#4.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-wkd}

-   The History of the Discovery of Radiation and Radioactivity:
    [http://mightylib.mit.edu/Course%20Materials/22.01/Fall%202001/discovery%20of%20radiation.pdf](discovery%20of%20radiation.pdf)
-   Two amazing X-ray stories:
    [http://www.faltublog.com/2011/09/23/the-worlds-2-most-shocking-x-ray-stories/]()
-   Biography of Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen:
    [http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/physics/laureates/1901/rontgen-bio.html](rontgen-bio.html)
-   Radioactivity:
    [http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/nuclear/radact.html](radact.html)
-   Bievre, P. de, and H. S. Peiser. 1992. 'Atomic weight': The name,
    its history, definition, and units. Pure and Applied Chemistry
    64 (10):1535-1543.
-   Kotz, John, and Heith Purcell. 1991. Chemistry &
    Chemical Reactivity. Orlando, FL: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
-   Partington, J. R. 1989. A Short History of Chemistry. 3 ed. New
    York: Macmillan. Reissued by Dover Publications.
-   Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen - Biography:
    [http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/physics/laureates/1901/rontgen-bio.html](rontgen-bio.html)

## Points to Consider {#4.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-elw}

-   In this chapter, we discussed the structure of the atom and saw that
    it contains a nucleus that consists of protons and neutrons. The
    nucleus is surrounded by negatively charged particles
    called electrons. How do you think electrons might be arranged
    around the nucleus?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686092] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#4.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-bv9}

1.  Raphael.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sanzio\_01\_Plato\_Aristotle.jpg](File:Sanzio_01_Plato_Aristotle.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  Hendrick Bloemaert.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hendrick\_Bloemaert\_Democritus.jpg](File:Hendrick_Bloemaert_Democritus.jpg) .
    Public Domain
3.  Joseph Allen.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:John\_Dalton.jpeg](File:John_Dalton.jpeg) .
    Public Domain
4.  User:Chetvornoa/Wikipedia and User:Drondent/Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Crookes\_tube2\_diagram.svg](File:Crookes_tube2_diagram.svg) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plum\_pudding\_atom.svg](File:Plum_pudding_atom.svg) .
    Public Domain
6.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
7.  Courtesy of NASA.
    [http://imagine.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/science/know\_l1/history1\_xray.html](history1_xray.html) .
    Public Domain
8.  .
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ernest\_Rutherford.jpg](File:Ernest_Rutherford.jpg) .
    Public Domain
9.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
10. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
11. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
12. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
13. Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
14. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="5.html"></span>

# Electrons in Atoms {#5.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb25zIGluIEF0b21z-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_5_files/20151009235155463540.jpeg)
</span>

Light has always intrigued humans. Whether it was the light from the sun
or the light from a fire, we have used light and made light when none
was naturally available. The interaction of light with different
materials has long been studied. Research by scientists in the late
nineteenth century led to an intriguing discovery. Light, under the
right conditions, creates a small voltage (ejects electrons) when shined
on certain metals. Einstein eventually explained this photoelectric
effect, adding to our essential understanding of the nature of light.
This discovery formed the foundation for a technology which later became
known as photovoltaic cells. Photovoltaic cells are the materials found
in the solar panels shown in the figure above. The solar panels shown
here can generate enough electricity throughout the day to power 5
average American homes (assuming an average monthly energy use of about
\~1000 kWh). Photovoltaic cells have become quite affordable and are now
a reasonable alternative for electricity generation.

^Image\\ copyright\\ anweber,\\ 2014.\\ www.shutterstock.com.\\ Used\\ under\\ license\\ from\\ Shutterstock.com.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686094] -->

# Properties of Light {#5.html#x-ck12-UHJvcGVydGllcyBvZiBMaWdodA..}

## Lesson Objectives {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-fxu}

-   Describe the mathematical relationship between the speed,
    wavelength, and frequency of electromagnetic radiation.
-   Describe the experiments that led to the discovery of the
    photoelectric effect and how the results were used to further inform
    our understanding of electrons and light.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-bv4}

-   **light** : A form of energy that behaves both as a particle and
    a wave.
-   **frequency** : Inversely proportional to wavelength. Photons with
    high frequency light have more energy than photons with low
    frequency light (Zukav 1979).
-   **wavelength** : The distance between two crests of a wave of light.
    The color of light is related to its wavelength. This is inversely
    proportional to frequency.
-   **photoelectric effect** : Occurs when same types of electromagnetic
    radiation are shined on certain kinds of matter.
-   **photon** : A description of light as particles.

## Check Your Understanding {#5.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-4wd}

-   What are the general properties of light?
-   Are there substances whose color varies with changes in the
    environment or natural surroundings?

## The Nature of Electromagnetic Radiation {#5.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE5hdHVyZSBvZiBFbGVjdHJvbWFnbmV0aWMgUmFkaWF0aW9u-gyo}

Many kinds of waves exist, such as sound waves and water waves. Visible
**light** is also a wave. It is a specific type of a more general
phenomenon called an electromagnetic wave. All waves can be described in
terms of the basic physical properties **frequency** and **wavelength**
. These two properties are related to the speed of a wave by the
following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZmRhM2UxNTc4YjM5ZDkwMDU3YTA2MmM3N2MxODY4YjA.-shl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmRhM2UxNTc4YjM5ZDkwMDU3YTA2MmM3N2MxODY4YjA.-yrj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmRhM2UxNTc4YjM5ZDkwMDU3YTA2MmM3N2MxODY4YjA.-nbd">
<dd>
speed = λν

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where λ is the wavelength (usually expressed in meters) and ν is the
frequency (expressed in Hertz, where 1 Hz = 1 s ^-1^ ). All
electromagnetic waves travel at a speed of 2.998 × 10 ^8^ meters/second
(about 186,000 miles per hour), which is known as the speed of light. We
commonly abbreviate the speed of light as c when used in equations. In
the case of electromagnetic radiation, this equation becomes the
following:

<dl id="x-ck12-NzdjNjg0YmRlMzdkYTMwYTNiYmU3OWYyNWQ1YmYyYzU.-6kd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzdjNjg0YmRlMzdkYTMwYTNiYmU3OWYyNWQ1YmYyYzU.-8bq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzdjNjg0YmRlMzdkYTMwYTNiYmU3OWYyNWQ1YmYyYzU.-eac">
<dd>
c = λν

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If c is expressed in meters per second, the wavelength must be expressed
in meters.

**Example 5.1**

The brilliant red colors seen in fireworks are due to the emission of
light from strontium salts such as Sr(NO ~3~ ) ~2~ and SrCO ~3~ .
Calculate the frequency in Hz of red light with a wavelength of 6.50 ×
10 ^2^ nm.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-MWYxNTY1MTA2YWFmMzhmZWQ3NThlZGRiMThlZGIwZmI.-g30">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDE2YTM2YmEzNzc3ZTAyMWEzZTZkMWNiOTk1ZDE0Y2U.-q1d">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDE2YTM2YmEzNzc3ZTAyMWEzZTZkMWNiOTk1ZDE0Y2U.-1zd">
<dd>
λν = c

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjQ3Mjk5ZjVmYTViMzE1ODU1NTkxOTdiODBkYWY5NzM.-sl4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjQ3Mjk5ZjVmYTViMzE1ODU1NTkxOTdiODBkYWY5NzM.-6gm">
<dd>
ν = c/λ = (2.998 × 10 ^8^ m/sec)/(6.5 × 10 ^-7^ m) = 4.61 × 10 ^14^ sec
^-1^ = 4.61 × 10 ^14^ Hz

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
### Electromagnetism {#5.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb21hZ25ldGlzbQ..-m5m}

Much of our understanding of the light and the way it behaves is based
on the work of Michael Faraday, James Maxwell, and Heinrich Hertz. In
1845, the English chemist and physicist Michael Faraday (1791–1867)
discovered that light exhibited magnetic properties. His early
experiments measured what happened to light when passed through magnetic
fields. Following Faraday’s work, the Scottish physicist and
mathematician James Maxwell (1831–1879) studied electromagnetic
radiation and light. Maxwell calculated the speed of light, which was
later confirmed by other scientists to be the very value Maxwell
proposed. From his work, Maxwell inferred that light was probably a
transverse electromagnetic wave ( **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDItV2F2ZQ..) ). He published this
conclusion in 1873.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-ZTkxNjE0ZmRiZjg3ODJlMjNlMjExNjZiNDEwNWZlM2M.-lpb"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of NOAA" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.srh.noaa.gov/jetstream/remote/remote_intro.htm" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235155592478.png)

**Figure 5.1**

The image shows light as a transverse wave. It consists of oscillating
magnetic and electric fields that are perpendicular to each other and to
the direction in which the light is traveling.

</div>

### The Electromagnetic Spectrum {#5.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEVsZWN0cm9tYWduZXRpYyBTcGVjdHJ1bQ..-gbi}

In 1888, shortly after Maxwell published his findings, German physicist
Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894) confirmed Maxwell’s inference, showing that
light was indeed an electromagnetic wave. Hertz extended Maxwell’s work
and produced electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths that were not in
the visible part of the spectrum. In fact, visible light makes up only a
very small part of the entire electromagnetic spectrum ( **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDMtU3BlY3RydW0.) ).

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-OWI2MTc0M2Y2NTBjYmFkMmI4NTFjY2ZkYWU3MDdjNDE.-2jx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235155732086.png)

**Figure 5.2**

In this figure we see the electromagnetic spectrum. Each form
represented on the spectrum has a unique range of wavelengths and
frequencies. For example, all visible light has wavelengths that range
between \~400 nm to 700 nm.

</div>

**Example 5.2**

Which type of light has a longer wavelength: red or blue?

*Answer:*

*As is shown in* ***Figure***
*[above](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDMtU3BlY3RydW0.) , red light has
longer wavelength than blue light. It is to the left of blue light in
the diagram.*

**Example 5.3**

Based on what is displayed in the **Figure**
[above](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDMtU3BlY3RydW0.) , what is the
relationship between wavelength and frequency?

*Answer:*

*Wavelength is inversely proportional to frequency. As wavelength
increases, frequency decreases. As wavelength decreases, frequency
increases.*

## Photoelectric Effect {#5.html#x-ck12-UGhvdG9lbGVjdHJpYyBFZmZlY3Q.-gdc}

Under the right conditions, light can be used to eject electrons from a
solid material. This phenomenon, known as the **photoelectric effect** ,
occurs when some types of electromagnetic radiation are shined on
certain kinds of matter. **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDQtUGhvdG9lbGVjdHJpYyBFZmZlY3Q.)
shows light rays of a specific wavelength striking a metal object and
causing electrons, or photoelectrons, to be ejected from the surface.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-OGFlMGY4NDdjYWVjZmQ2MWUzOGM5ZWZjMzI2OGQxZTQ.-mcc"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Afrank99/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fotoelektrischer_Effekt.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235155850393.png)

**Figure 5.3**

Photoelectric effect.

</div>

The photoelectric effect was explored by many scientists in the 1800s.
It involves the same fundamental principle by which modern-day solar
cells operate. Whether electrons will be released depends on two
factors: the wavelength of the light source and the material onto which
the light is being shined. Here is a video of a simple photoelectric
experiment:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WO38qVDGgqw](watch?v=WO38qVDGgqw)
(0:26).

[![](ck12_5_files/tmpwiRF4X.jpeg)](WO38qVDGgqw%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D2a6ed7e703e314ae03830ade93c290a6)

Click on the image above for more content

### Light Exhibits Particle Behavior {#5.html#x-ck12-TGlnaHQgRXhoaWJpdHMgUGFydGljbGUgQmVoYXZpb3I.-hrp}

Further study of the photoelectric effect revealed some perplexing
behavior that could not be explained by the classical view of light as
just a wave phenomenon. For example, the intensity of the light did not
affect the amount of energy possessed by the ejected photoelectrons.
Photoelectrons emitted with the use of a very bright light had the same
energy as those emitted with the use of a dim light of the same
frequency. However, a relationship was observed between the number of
photoelectrons ejected and the intensity of the light source. It was
found that the brighter the light sources, the more photoelectrons were
ejected. Another puzzling aspect of the photoelectric effect was that a
minimum frequency of light was required in order to eject any electrons
at all, regardless of how intense the light source was.

Albert Einstein (1879–1955) studied this effect further, and in 1905, he
postulated that light can also be thought of in terms of particles, now
called **photons** . Photons of high frequency light have more energy
than the photons of low frequency light (Zukav 1979), which explained
why a minimum frequency was required for electrons to be ejected by a
given light source. **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDYtV2F2ZWxlbmd0aA..) illustrates
this effect.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-MmZmYjk0MjI1YjZhNGNlMjg3M2E4MzkyZWMwNTk4NjA.-uuh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235155953561.png)

**Figure 5.4**

Wavelength of Light and Photoelectric Effect

</div>

Materials that eject electrons when illuminated with light, such as
potassium, are called photoemissive. Not all materials are
photoemissive, nor are all light sources capable of initiating electron
emission from a given substance. For example, in **Figure**
[above](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDYtV2F2ZWxlbmd0aA..) , we see that
700 nm light will not initiate electron ejection, while 550 nm light
will.

## Lesson Summary {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-u7k}

-   Light behaves both as a particle and as a wave.
-   Michael Faraday discovered that light exhibited magnetic properties.
-   James Maxwell demonstrated that the speed of light is constant and
    that light exists as a transverse wave.
-   Hertz showed that light was an electromagnetic wave and only one
    type of electromagnetic radiation in a much larger
    electromagnetic spectrum.
-   The color of light is related to its wavelength, which is the
    distance between two crests of a wave of light.
-   The photoelectric effect occurs when sufficiently energetic
    electromagnetic radiation is shined on certain kinds of matter,
    causing electrons to be ejected.
-   The photoelectric effect provides an example of light acting as a
    particle instead of a wave.

## Lesson Review Questions {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-ktv}

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-MGM0MjMzNzc5NTg0OTNjYjMzMjU2ODE1Mzg5ZjAyMTg.-mt0"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Radio antenna: Image copyright Baloncici, 2014; Longwave antenna: User:Junglecat/Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="Radio antenna: http://www.shutterstock.com; Longwave antenna: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CB_antenna.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Radio antenna: Used under license from Shutterstock.com; Longwave antenna: Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156069249.jpeg)

**Figure 5.5**

Left: Radio antenna. Right: Long wave (CB radio) antenna

</div>

1.  What type of electromagnetic radiation (what wavelength) do you
    suppose the antenna on each of these vehicles shown in the
    **Figure** [above](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMDgtQW50ZW5uYXM.) is
    designed to receive?
2.  Black lights are used for a variety of applications, including
    sterilization of materials. Why do you suppose the light is called
    “black light”? Are there other forms of black light?
3.  The laser in an audio compact disc player uses light with a
    frequency of 3.844 × 10 ^14^ Hz. Calculate the wavelength of this
    light in nm.
4.  An FM radio station broadcasts at 99.5 MHz. Calculate the wavelength
    in meters of the corresponding radio waves.
5.  Microwave radiation has a wavelength on the order of 1.0 cm.
    Calculate the frequency in s ^-1^ of a single photon of
    this radiation.
6.  As the frequency of electromagnetic radiation doubles, the
    wavelength \_\_\_?
7.  As the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation is quadrupled, the
    frequency \_\_\_?
8.  The yellow light given off by a sodium vapor lamp has a wavelength
    of 589.0 nm. What is the frequency of this radiation in Hz?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#5.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-wgx}

-   Young’s Double Slit Experiment:
    [http://www.studyphysics.ca/newnotes/20/unit04\_light/chp1719\_light/lesson58.htm](lesson58.htm)
-   National Geographic’s Patterns in Nature:
    [http://photography.nationalgeographic.com/photography/patterns-in-nature/]()
-   Following the Path of Discovery:
    [http://www.juliantrubin.com/bigten/hertzexperiment.html](hertzexperiment.html)
-   International Lighting Vocabulary:
    [http://www.cie.co.at/publ/abst/17-4-89.html](17-4-89.html)

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686094] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686095] -->

# The Bohr and Quantum Mechanical Models of the Atom {#5.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEJvaHIgYW5kIFF1YW50dW0gTWVjaGFuaWNhbCBNb2RlbHMgb2YgdGhlIEF0b20.}

## Lesson Objectives {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-dn5}

-   Describe Planck’s work with hydrogen emission spectra, and explain
    how this work further informed our understanding of the atom.
-   Describe the discoveries of DeBroglie, Schrodinger, and Heisenberg,
    and explain how their work led to a revised understanding of the
    atom, electrons, and light.
-   Describe the Bohr model and the quantum model of the atom.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-mfb}

-   **emission spectra** : When most substances are heated to high
    enough temperatures that they give off light of various wavelengths.
-   **Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle** : States that the more
    precisely the position of a particle is determined, the less
    precisely the momentum is known in this instant, and vice versa.

## Check Your Understanding {#5.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-mmy}

-   What are some sources for light of different wavelengths?
-   What is the relationship between the color of visible light and its
    wavelength?

## Introduction {#5.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-avz}

Toward the end of the 1800s, we understood light as being composed of
electromagnetic radiation waves that travel at a constant speed (c) and
can be described by their wavelength (λ) or frequency (ν). However,
beginning in the 1900s, new findings emerged about the workings of the
atom and the composition of matter. It began with confirmation that
light sometimes behaved as a particle, as seen in experiments on the
photoelectric effect. Light particles, or photons, were found to have a
defined and measurable amount of energy. Other findings emerged at this
time, showing that not only could waves (like light) behave as a
particle, but particles (such as electrons) could sometimes behave like
waves. This concept of wave-particle duality ultimately led to a
revolution in our understanding of matter, light, and how we view the
universe.

## Hydrogen Emission Spectra {#5.html#x-ck12-SHlkcm9nZW4gRW1pc3Npb24gU3BlY3RyYQ.._1-xho}

When most substances are heated to high enough temperatures, they give
off light of various wavelengths; these are referred to as **emission
spectra** . Planck studied the emission spectra of different objects and
saw that when certain substances were heated, they emitted only specific
wavelengths of light. In other words, the spectra were discontinuous. In
particular, the emission spectrum of hydrogen included only four
wavelengths within the visible light range, which could be seen
separately by passing the emitted light through a prism ( **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMTUtRW1pc3Npb24tU3BlY3RyYQ..) ).

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-MmRjYjNmNjUzNmRkMWRmMWQzMThiNGI2MzdlNTg5MmE.-vrn"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung, using emission spectra by User:Merikanto/Wikimedia Commons and User:Adrignola/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation; H spectrum: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Emission_spectrum-H.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0 (H emission spectra available under public domain)" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156190158.png)

**Figure 5.6**

Hydrogen emission spectrum.

</div>

Planck’s interpretation of this phenomenon was that the emissions were
quantized – they were only emitted in fixed and predictable intervals
(Haendler 1982; Goodney 1991). This was described mathematically by the
following expression, E = hν, where E is the energy of a single photon,
h is Planck’s constant, and ν is the frequency of the electromagnetic
wave. Because of this influential work on photons and quanta, Planck was
awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918.

## Bohr’s Atomic Model {#5.html#x-ck12-Qm9ocuKAmXMgQXRvbWljIE1vZGVs_1-xek}

Following the discoveries of hydrogen emission spectra, the Danish
physicist Niels Bohr (1885–1962) proposed a new model of the atom in
1915. Bohr suggested that electrons do not radiate energy as they travel
around the nucleus but exist in states of constant energy, which he
called stationary states (Haendler 1982), orbiting at fixed distances
from the nucleus ( **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMTYtQm9oci1Nb2RlbA..) ). Bohr’s work
was primarily based on the emission spectra of hydrogen, and it won him
the Nobel Prize in physics in 1922.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-YmRlYWNhNDhjZjRiYWQ1ODFiNTBlMTljZTI5MDIyMDA.-k20"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156295558.png)

**Figure 5.7**

Bohr’s atomic model.

</div>

This model, also referred to as the planetary model of the atom,
explained emission spectra in terms of electrons moving between
different stationary orbits that have different levels of energy. When
energy is added, an electron can jump up to a higher energy orbit, and
when the electron relaxes back to a lower energy orbit, the difference
in energy is emitted as a photon of light. Using the observed
frequencies of the emitted photons, the energy differences between
orbits in the hydrogen atom could be determined. Since the orbits had
set differences in energy, only certain amounts of energy could be
released for any single transition. The energy released could not be any
arbitrary amount, but was instead quantized (limited to specific
values). This formed the basis for what later became known as quantum
theory, which accounts for a wide range of physical phenomena that could
not previously be explained.

Bohr’s work had a strong influence on our modern understanding of the
inner workings of the atom. However, although his model worked well for
predicting the emissions of the hydrogen atom, it was seriously limited
when applied to other atoms. Shortly after Bohr published his planetary
model of the atom, several new discoveries were made, which resulted in,
yet again, a revised view of the atom.

## Wave-Particle Duality {#5.html#x-ck12-V2F2ZS1QYXJ0aWNsZSBEdWFsaXR5_1-ohw}

French born Physicist Lois de Broglie (1892–1987) studied diffraction
patterns of electrons, which seemed to indicate that electrons were
behaving as waves, even though they were composed of matter. Further
diffraction and interference experiments confirmed these findings. In
1924, de Broglie showed that particles exhibit wavelengths that are
inversely proportional to their momentum. Because of this inverse
relationship, large objects have wavelengths that are immeasurably
small, so wave behavior is not observed. However, the momentum of a very
tiny particle, like an electron, can be small enough to detect wave-like
behavior during certain types of experiments.

### Electrons as Particles {#5.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb25zIGFzIFBhcnRpY2xlcw.._1-tvl}

Two years after de Broglie’s work, in 1926, the Austrian physicist Erwin
Schrödinger (1887–1961) found that the behavior of electrons in atoms
could be described by considering them to be standing waves. He was able
to incorporate both particle behavior (mass) and wave behavior (an
indefinite location in space) into one equation. The mathematical wave
function for an electron provided a way to predict the probability of
finding the electron in a given region of space. Schrödinger received
the Nobel Prize in physics in 1933.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-OWIzZTc2OWFhYmFkODYwZDgyMjc4YWZiNmQ2Y2Y0MzI.-aog"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156404152.png)

**Figure 5.8**

Electrons exist in atoms as standing waves.

</div>

### Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle {#5.html#x-ck12-SGVpc2VuYmVyZyBVbmNlcnRhaW50eSBQcmluY2lwbGU._1-oix}

At about the same time that Schrӧdinger was working out the mathematics
of standing waves, the German physicist Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976)
showed mathematically that it is impossible to determine simultaneously
the exact location and the exact velocity of an electron, or of any
other particle. In 1927, Heisenberg presented a paper in which he showed
that “the more precisely the position of a particle is determined, the
less precisely the momentum is known in this instant, and vice versa”
(Hilgevoord and Uffink 2011). This later became known as **Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle** .

## Lesson Summary {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-vv7}

-   The emission spectrum of hydrogen is discontinuous. The spectrum is
    made up of discrete lines representing transitions of the hydrogen
    electron between specific energy levels within the atom.
-   In 1915, Bohr proposed a new model of the atom in which electrons
    exist in states of constant energy, called stationary states,
    orbiting at fixed distances from the nucleus. Bohr’s work was
    primarily based on the emission spectrum of hydrogen.
-   DeBroglie proposed in 1924 that any object exhibits a wavelength
    that is inversely proportional to its momentum. Because of this
    relationship, only very tiny particles will exhibit
    measurable wavelengths.
-   Two years after DeBroglie’s work, in 1926, the Austrian physicist
    Erwin Schrӧdinger described the behavior of electrons in atoms as
    standing waves.
-   Heisenberg showed that it is impossible to determine simultaneously
    both the exact location and exact velocity of an electron or any
    other particle. This became known as the Heisenberg
    uncertainty principle.

## Lesson Review Questions {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-nko}

1.  Describe the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom. What were the
    shortcomings of this model?
2.  What are emission spectra?
3.  Hydrogen has four, distinct emission spectra. What does general
    property of emissions does this indicate?
4.  How are emission spectra related to energy levels within an atom?
5.  What important property of electrons did DeBroglie’s experiments
    demonstrate?
6.  What is indicated by the term, “wave-particle duality”?
7.  What are the distinguishing characteristics of wave and particle
    behavior?
8.  Describe the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#5.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-lkc}

-   Star Light, Star Bright Teacher Page: Science Background at
    [http://amazing-space.stsci.edu/resources/explorations/light/star-light-science.html](star-light-science.html)

## Points to Consider {#5.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-mtv}

-   In this lesson, we studied the experimental origins for our current
    understanding of electrons and light. We studied the simplest of
    atoms, the hydrogen atom, and looked at how electrons behave in
    this atom. Now, we are going to study the behavior of electrons in
    atoms of various other elements.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686095] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686096] -->

# Electron Arrangement in Atoms {#5.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb24gQXJyYW5nZW1lbnQgaW4gQXRvbXM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-mxa}

-   Define the four quantum numbers and describe how they are used to
    determine the location (orbital) of an electron in an atom.
-   List the total number of electrons needed to fully occupy each
    main level.
-   State the Aufbau principle, the Pauli exclusion principle, and
    Hund’s rule.
-   Describe the electron configurations for the atoms of any element
    using orbital filling diagrams, electron configurations and, when
    appropriate, noble-gas notation.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-urh}

-   **orbital** : The region in space in which an electron is most
    likely to be found.
-   **quantum numbers** : A series of specific numbers used to describe
    the location of an electron in an associated atom.
-   **electron configuration** : The set of orbitals occupied by
    electrons in a given atom.
-   **ground state** : The electron configuration of an atom in its
    neutral state in which the electrons occupy the lowest possible
    energy levels.
-   **Aufbau principle** : States that all lower energy orbitals must be
    filled before electrons can be added to a higher energy orbital.
-   **Pauli exclusion principle** : States that no two electrons in same
    atom can have the same set of four quantum numbers.
-   **Hund’s rule** : States that in a set of orbitals that are
    energetically equivalent, each orbital is occupied by a single
    electron before any orbital within the set is occupied by a
    second electron.
-   **noble gas notation** : A shorthand for the electron configuration
    of an atom in which the elemental symbol of the last noble gas prior
    to that element in the periodic table is written first, followed by
    the configuration of the remaining electrons.

## Check Your Understanding {#5.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-vnq}

-   Describe the properties of light.
-   What type of relationship have we already seen between light and
    electrons?

## Introduction {#5.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-j9h}

In the last lesson, we studied the experimental origins for an area of
study called quantum mechanics. We learned that both electrons and light
exhibit properties normally associated with both waves and particles,
which dramatically affects the way we describe the atomic nature of
matter. Our focus in this lesson will be on the arrangement of electrons
in atoms. This is important because a great many phenomena in the
chemical world can be explained by studying the ways that electrons are
arranged in an atom of interest. For example, only a small amount of
energy needs to be expended to remove an electron from atoms of some
elements, most of which are metallic. Other atoms, such as nitrogen or
oxygen, require a much larger energy investment in order to remove an
electron. Looking at the arrangement, or configuration, of electrons in
a given atom helps us to predict this and other properties that are
characteristic of a given atom.

## Atomic Orbitals {#5.html#x-ck12-QXRvbWljIE9yYml0YWxz_2-hxa}

In the Bohr model, the atom is viewed as a densely packed nucleus
comprised of neutrons and protons that is surrounded by electrons at
fixed distances, which correspond to specific energy levels. However,
the quantum model showed that the distances between electrons and the
nucleus are not really fixed. Due to their wave-like nature, we cannot
pinpoint the exact location of an electron that is in motion, but we can
determine the probability that a given electron will be in a particular
region in three-dimensional space. Schrӧdinger’s equations are used to
determine the position of a specific electron with respect to a nearby
nucleus. The region in space in which an electron is most likely to be
found is referred to as an **orbital** .

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-ZjMzNTJmODUzNWM3NWQ5ODg1MWFmMTc5M2UzY2YyMmE.-dpl"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156551764.png)

**Figure 5.9**

The images shown here are of simulations of probability density
distributions of different electron states in the hydrogen atom. They
represent where the electron is most likely to exist relative to the
nucleus (Zukav 1979). There are different orbitals which can exist for a
given atom and which a given electron can occupy. The four orbital types
shown here are: (1) the spherically shaped s-orbital; (2)
dumbbell-shaped p-orbitals (which are oriented in three different
directions); (3) d-orbitals (which have five different possible
orientations); and (4) f-orbitals (which have seven different possible
orientations).

</div>

## Quantum Numbers {#5.html#x-ck12-UXVhbnR1bSBOdW1iZXJz_2-0km}

We use a series of specific numbers, called **quantum numbers** , to
describe the location of an electron in an associated atom. An electron
in an atom or ion has four quantum numbers to describe its state. Think
of them as important variables in an equation which describes the
three-dimensional position of electrons in a given atom.

### Principal Quantum Number {#5.html#x-ck12-UHJpbmNpcGFsIFF1YW50dW0gTnVtYmVy_2-huq}

The principal quantum number, signified by (n), is the main energy level
occupied by the electron. Electrons in orbitals with higher principal
quantum numbers are, on average, further from the nucleus and higher in
energy. Possible values for the principal quantum number include any
positive whole number (e.g., 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, ...). As we will see, the
principal quantum number is related to the row in which an element
appears on the periodic table.

### Angular Momentum Quantum Number {#5.html#x-ck12-QW5ndWxhciBNb21lbnR1bSBRdWFudHVtIE51bWJlcg.._2-rd8}

The angular momentum quantum number, signified by ( *l* ), describes the
general shape of the region occupied by an electron. The possible
value(s) of *l* depend on the value of the principal quantum number n.
The angular momentum quantum number can be any whole number between zero
and (n-1). For example, if n = 2, *l* could be either 0 or 1.

### Magnetic Quantum Number {#5.html#x-ck12-TWFnbmV0aWMgUXVhbnR1bSBOdW1iZXI._2-jef}

The magnetic quantum number, signified by ( *m ~l~* ), describes the
orientation of an orbital in space. For a given value of the angular
momentum quantum number *l* , there are (2 *l* + 1) possible values for
*m ~l~* , which are determined as follows:

- *l* , (- *l* +1) ... 0 ... (+ *l* – 1), + *l*

For example:

<dl id="x-ck12-YWUwNzRlNGM2OGE5NTllOWFhMDNhYTdiNWY4MzM4MzY.-pc2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGMxZWVhM2EwZjhmNzRlYmQ1ZDhmZjgxOGVhMzU4ZDI.-azx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGMxZWVhM2EwZjhmNzRlYmQ1ZDhmZjgxOGVhMzU4ZDI.-evw">
<dd>
If n = 2

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MzA1ZmFjNDM3ZTc2OTM2ZTA0MDYyNzc0MmNhMjc3Yjc.-xjs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MzA1ZmFjNDM3ZTc2OTM2ZTA0MDYyNzc0MmNhMjc3Yjc.-h4f">
<dd>
Then *l* = 0 or 1

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjRkNTgyMDQ3MGU2NTk0YTg0MTMxNmFmNTRkNWFkNTA.-ycs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjRkNTgyMDQ3MGU2NTk0YTg0MTMxNmFmNTRkNWFkNTA.-yon">
<dd>
for *l* = 0, *m ~l~* = 0

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTNjM2EzNjgxNGZlZWJkY2Q5MTJlNDIwMzg0YmYyNGU.-9fs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTNjM2EzNjgxNGZlZWJkY2Q5MTJlNDIwMzg0YmYyNGU.-wgr">
<dd>
for *l* = 1, *m ~l~* = -1, 0, or +1

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The **Table** [below](#5.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNS4x) shows the
possible magnetic quantum number values ( *m ~l~* ) for the
corresponding angular momentum quantum number ( *l* ).

+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| n            | Possible     | Subshell     | Possible     | Number of    | Total Number |
|              | Values of    | Designation  | Values of *m | Orbitals in  | of Orbitals  |
|              | *l*          |              | ~l~*         | Subshell     | in Shell     |
+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+==============+
| 1            | 0            | 1s           | 0            | 1            | 1            |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| 2            | 0            | 2s           | 0            | 1            | 4            |
|              |              |              |              |              |              |
|              | 1            | 2p           | 1, 0, -1     | 3            |              |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| 3            | 0            | 3s           | 0            | 1            | 9            |
|              |              |              |              |              |              |
|              | 1            | 3p           | 1, 0, -1     | 3            |              |
|              |              |              |              |              |              |
|              | 2            | 3d           | 2, 1, 0, -1, | 5            |              |
|              |              |              | -2           |              |              |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| 4            | 0            | 4s           | 0            | 1            | 16           |
|              |              |              |              |              |              |
|              | 1            | 4p           | 1, 0, -1     | 3            |              |
|              |              |              |              |              |              |
|              | 2            | 4d           | 2, 1, 0, -1, | 5            |              |
|              |              |              | -2           |              |              |
|              | 3            | 4f           |              | 7            |              |
|              |              |              | 3, 2, 1, 0,  |              |              |
|              |              |              | -1, -2, -3   |              |              |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+

:  Relationships among Values of n,

### Spin Quantum Number {#5.html#x-ck12-U3BpbiBRdWFudHVtIE51bWJlcg.._2-ntf}

The spin quantum number describes the spin for a given electron. An
electron can have one of two possible spin values, either +½ or -½. An
electron cannot have zero spin. We also represent spin with arrows ↑ or
↓, and correspondingly, *m ~s~* values of +½ or -½ are sometimes
referred to as “spin up” and “spin down” electrons. A single orbital can
hold a maximum of two electrons, but only if they have opposite spins.
Another way to say this is that no two electrons in an atom can have the
same four quantum numbers. They cannot occupy the same orbital,
designated by the first three numbers, and have the same spin, indicated
by the final number.

### s, p, d, and f Orbitals {#5.html#x-ck12-cywgcCwgZCwgYW5kIGYgT3JiaXRhbHM._2-zqp}

The shapes corresponding to each value of *l* also go by different
names, each designated by a single letter (chosen based on older
analyses of atomic emission spectra). For example, an electron for which
*l* = 0 is located in an s orbital, regardless of the value of its
principal quantum number n. This orbital is spherical in shape, as seen
in **Figure** [below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tNS0yMC1zLU9yYml0YWw.) .

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-YjM2ZWUxYjllODI0N2I3OWI3ZDBmYzIyMDc0MDg3YjQ.-oh5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joanna Ko&#347;mider" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orbital_s.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156679073.png)

**Figure 5.10**

An s orbital

</div>

Electrons for which *l* = 1 are located in dumbbell-shaped p orbitals.
**Table** [above](#5.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNS4x) shows us that p
orbitals can have three possible orientations (designated by three
values for *m ~l~* ), each of which is perpendicular to the two others
in three-dimensional space ( **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tNS0yMi1BbGwtcC1PcmJpdGFs) ).

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-MWU3NjNmYjE5MzZlNTMwNWFlNmI4MWIxNzg4ODQwYzk.-0rd"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235156795162.png)

**Figure 5.11**

Three individual p orbitals are centered on the nucleus of the atom.
This figure shows them both separately and together.

</div>

When *l* = 2, the possible *m ~l~* values include -2, -1, 0, +1, and +2,
for a total of five d orbitals. The relative orientations for each of
these orbitals are shown in **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMjMtZC1PcmJpdGFs) . Note that even
though one of the d orbitals appears to have a different shape than the
others, it is still mathematically equivalent and exhibits the same
properties (such as total energy) as the other d orbitals.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-YWY1MmJjNzIxZGY3N2JjNTk4NDMzNGE4MTUxMmNjMzM.-5vl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235157130204.png)

**Figure 5.12**

Relative geometry of the d orbitals

</div>

The most complex set of orbitals that we will encounter are the f
orbitals. When *l* = 3, possible values for *m ~l~* include -3, -2, -1,
0, +1, +2, and +3, for a total of seven distinct orbitals. The relative
orientations for each of these orbitals are shown in **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMjQtZi1PcmJpdGFs) .

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-NDUwNDVmZTdjNjUwNGZjNmEzOThlMjIyNDA4NTAwY2Y.-mn8"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235157244867.png)

**Figure 5.13**

Relative geometry of the f orbitals

</div>

## Rules for Determining Electron Configurations {#5.html#x-ck12-UnVsZXMgZm9yIERldGVybWluaW5nIEVsZWN0cm9uIENvbmZpZ3VyYXRpb25z_2-wg0}

Now that we know about some of the possible locations (orbitals) in an
atom that can be occupied by electrons, how can we predict which
orbitals will contain electrons and how many each will contain? The set
of orbitals occupied by electrons in a given atom is referred to as its
**electron configuration** . An electron configuration essentially
provides a map of where each electron is likely to be located in a given
atom. In the case of a free, electrically neutral atom, the atom is
considered to be in a **ground state** . This means its electrons are in
the lowest energy locations. Several rules can be used to determine the
lowest energy locations of the various electrons in a free atom.

### Aufbau Principle {#5.html#x-ck12-QXVmYmF1IFByaW5jaXBsZQ.._2-yxu}

To determine the lowest energy electron configuration for a given atom,
it is first necessary to organize the atomic sublevels in order of
increasing energy. **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDUtMTYtQXVmYmF1LXByaW5j) shows the
relative energies of various sublevels.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-ZWE5MGFiMDBkNGE1NGZkNWM3MzVmNDJiZDQxNzE2ZTk.-d2q"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235157360480.png)

**Figure 5.14**

According to the Aufbau principle, all lower energy orbitals must be
filled before electrons can be added to a higher energy orbital. The
principal energy levels are color coded in this figure. Sublevels are
grouped together by column, and each circle represents an orbital that
is capable of holding two electrons.

</div>

The lowest energy sublevel is always the 1s sublevel, which consists of
one orbital. The single electron of the hydrogen atom will occupy the 1s
orbital when the atom is in its ground state. As we move on to atoms
with more electrons, those electrons are sequentially added to the next
lowest sublevels, first 2s, then 2p, then 3s, and so on. The **Aufbau
principle** states that all lower energy orbitals must be filled before
electrons can be added to a higher energy orbital. The Aufbau principle
is sometimes referred to as the “building-up” principle. It is worth
noting that, in reality, atoms are not built by adding protons and
electrons one at a time. This method is merely a way for us to predict
and understand the end result.

As seen in **Figure**
[above](#5.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDUtMTYtQXVmYmF1LXByaW5j) , the energies
of the sublevels in different principal energy levels eventually begin
to overlap. After the 3p sublevel, it would seem logical that the 3d
sublevel should be the next lowest in energy. However, the 4s sublevel
is slightly lower in energy than the 3d sublevel, so the 4s orbital
fills first. After the 3d sublevel is filled, the next lowest sublevels
are 4p, 5s, and 4d. Note that the 4f sublevel does not fill until just
after the 6s sublevel. **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDUtMTctQXVmYmF1LWVhc3k.) is a useful and
simple aid for keeping track of the order in which electrons are first
added to each atomic sublevel.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-ZmViY2RjNDBiZWFmOWU2YTEwYjg1MThmM2NiMTY1MzU.-c74"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235157473872.png)

**Figure 5.15**

The Aufbau principle is illustrated in the diagram by following each red
arrow in order from top to bottom: 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, etc.

</div>

### Pauli Exclusion Principle {#5.html#x-ck12-UGF1bGkgRXhjbHVzaW9uIFByaW5jaXBsZQ.._2-eed}

As pointed out before, no two electrons in same atom can have the same
set of four quantum numbers; this concept is referred to as the **Pauli
exclusion principle** . If two electrons have the same three values for
n, *l* , and *m ~l~* , they would be found in the same orbital. In order
to maintain separate identities, two electrons in the same orbital would
need to have different spin quantum numbers ( *m ~s~* ). Because there
are only two possible spin quantum numbers, each orbital can hold a
maximum of two electrons, each of which must have a different spin.

### Hund’s Rule {#5.html#x-ck12-SHVuZOKAmXMgUnVsZQ.._2-0in}

**Hund's rule** states that, in a set of orbitals that are energetically
equivalent, each orbital is occupied by a single electron before any
orbital within the set is occupied by a second electron. Additionally,
all electrons in singly occupied orbitals prefer to have the same spin
quantum number. We will see more concrete examples of how this rule
works below in our discussion of orbital filling diagrams.

## Depicting Electron Configurations {#5.html#x-ck12-RGVwaWN0aW5nIEVsZWN0cm9uIENvbmZpZ3VyYXRpb25z_2-bwo}

### Orbital Filling Diagrams {#5.html#x-ck12-T3JiaXRhbCBGaWxsaW5nIERpYWdyYW1z_2-zeo}

There are multiple ways to depict the electron configuration of a given
atom. An orbital filling diagram provides a visual representation of the
way in which an atom's electrons are distributed into various orbitals.
Each orbital is shown as a single square (or circle), and orbitals
within the same sublevel are drawn directly next to each other. Each
sublevel is labeled by its principal quantum number and by its sublevel
(which corresponds to a specific value of *l* ). Electrons are indicated
by arrows inside the circles. An arrow pointing upwards indicates one
spin direction, while a downward pointing arrow indicates the other
direction. The orbital filling diagrams for hydrogen, helium, and
lithium are shown below.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_5_files/20151009235157581610.png) </span>

According to the Aufbau principle, sublevels and orbitals are filled
with electrons in order of increasing energy. Since the s sublevel
consists of just one orbital, the second electron simply pairs up with
the first electron, as in helium. The next element, lithium, requires
the use of the next available sublevel. The third electron must be
placed in a 2s orbital, because the 1s orbital is completely filled.

### Electron Configuration Notation {#5.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb24gQ29uZmlndXJhdGlvbiBOb3RhdGlvbg.._2-190}

Electron configuration notation is a shorthand version of the
information contained in orbital filling diagrams. The squares and
arrows are eliminated and replaced with the name of each occupied
sublevel and a superscript indicating the number of electrons present in
that sublevel. For example, the configuration of a hydrogen atom is 1s
^1^ , and the configuration of helium is 1s ^2^ . Multiple occupied
sublevels are placed one after another, so the electron configuration of
lithium is written 1s ^2^ 2s ^1^ . The sum of all the superscripts in an
electron configuration is equal to the number of electrons in that atom,
which is in turn equal to its atomic number.

### Noble Gas Notation {#5.html#x-ck12-Tm9ibGUgR2FzIE5vdGF0aW9u_2-wxb}

The elements that are found in the last column of the periodic table are
an important group of elements called the noble gases. They include
helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon. For elements with large
numbers of electrons, electron configurations can become quite long. The
electron configuration of an atom can be abbreviated by using **noble
gas notation** , in which the elemental symbol of the last noble gas
prior to that atom is written first, followed by the configuration of
the remaining electrons. Lithium can be used as an example to illustrate
this method, even though its configuration (1s ^2^ 2s ^1^ ) is not
especially long. Because helium has a configuration of 1s ^2^ , that
portion of the configuration for neon can be replaced by the symbol for
helium written in brackets, \[He\]. Now, the configuration for lithium
can be written as \[He\]2s ^1^ . This becomes more useful in the case of
larger atoms. For example, the full electron configuration for cesium is
1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^ 4s ^2^ 3d ^10^ 4p ^6^ 5s ^2^ 4d ^10^
5p ^6^ 6s ^1^ . Using noble gas notation, this becomes \[Xe\]6s ^1^ .
Comparing this to the configuration of lithium, it becomes easy to see
the similarity. Each of these elements has a configuration equivalent to
a noble gas plus a single electron in an s orbital. This fundamental
similarity causes the chemical properties of lithium and cesium to be
quite similar. We will revisit this trend when we discuss the structure
of the periodic table.

### Filling the Orbitals with Electrons - The First 10 Elements {#5.html#x-ck12-RmlsbGluZyB0aGUgT3JiaXRhbHMgd2l0aCBFbGVjdHJvbnMgLSBUaGUgRmlyc3QgMTAgRWxlbWVudHM._2-nru}

#### Hydrogen and Helium - The 1s Orbital {#5.html#x-ck12-SHlkcm9nZW4gYW5kIEhlbGl1bSAtIFRoZSAxcyBPcmJpdGFs_2-rms}

Now let's see how electrons are arranged for the first several elements.
We start with hydrogen, which has only one electron. According to the
Aufbau principle, this should be placed into the 1s orbital, which is
the lowest energy orbital. For the 1s orbital, n = 1, *l* = 0, and *m
~l~* = 0, since that is the only possible *m ~l~* value when *l* = 0.
Because there are no other electrons, it does not matter whether *m ~s~*
is +½ or -½. The configuration of hydrogen is 1s ^1^ , and possible
quantum numbers for this electron would be the following:

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s

  :  Atomic Number: 1 Element: Hydrogen

Helium has two electrons. The lowest energy orbital (1s) has enough room
to accommodate both, so the first three quantum numbers are the same for
both electrons. However, in order to follow the Pauli exclusion
principle, the spin of the second electron must be different from that
of the first. One electron has a spin of +½ and the other electron has a
spin of –½. Helium has a 1s ^2^ configuration, with two electrons in the
1s orbital. The quantum numbers for these two electrons are shown below:

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s

  :  Atomic Number: 2 Element: Helium

#### Lithium and Beryllium - The 2s Orbital {#5.html#x-ck12-TGl0aGl1bSBhbmQgQmVyeWxsaXVtIC0gVGhlIDJzIE9yYml0YWw._2-yx6}

Now that we have filled the 1s shell, we move to n = 2 and start to work
on the second shell with lithium.

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Name
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s

  :  Atomic Number: 3 Element: Lithium

Lithium has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^1^ .

There is space for one more electron in the 2s orbital, so we give that
second 2s electron a -½ spin.

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Name
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s

  :  Atomic Number: 4 Element: Beryllium

Beryllium has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ .

#### Boron Through Neon - The 2p Orbitals {#5.html#x-ck12-Qm9yb24gVGhyb3VnaCBOZW9uIC0gVGhlIDJwIE9yYml0YWxz_2-lh4}

Now that the 1s and 2s orbitals are filled, the next lowest energy
orbitals are the three 2p orbitals. For p orbitals, *l* = 1, which means
that *m ~l~* can have values of -1, 0, or +1. If there is only one
electron in a set of p orbitals, it does not matter which of the
possible values are used for *m ~l~* and *m ~s~* . One possible example
is shown in the following table:

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s
  2   1     -1        +½        2p

  :  Atomic Number: 5 Element: Boron

Boron has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^1^ .

Beginning with carbon, we start to see Hund’s rule come into play. The
rule states that orbitals of equal energy are each occupied by one
electron before any orbital is occupied by a second electron, and all
electrons in singly occupied orbitals must have the same spin. So the
sixth electron in carbon goes into another p orbital (with a different
*m ~l~* value), and its value for *m ~s~* must match as many of the
other 2p electrons as possible. A possible set of quantum numbers that
satisfies these criteria is shown below:

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s
  2   1     -1        +½        2p
  2   1     0         +½        2p

  :  Atomic Number: 6 Element: Carbon

Carbon has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^2^ .

Nitrogen has a third 2p electron, which should go into an orbital with
the third possible value for *m ~l~* . Again, the *m ~s~* values should
be the same for as many 2p electrons as possible, provided it does not
violate the Pauli exclusion principle. In this case, all three can have
the same spin value. Nitrogen has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p
^3^ .

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s
  2   1     -1        +½        2p
  2   1     0         +½        2p
  2   1     +1        +½        2p

  :  Atomic Number: 7 Element: Nitrogen

Now that we have no more empty orbitals within this subshell, we need to
start putting electrons in orbitals that are already partially occupied.
For oxygen, one of the 2p orbitals will contain two electrons, while the
others will still each have one. The electrons in the doubly occupied 2p
orbital must have different spins to avoid violating the Pauli exclusion
principle. Oxygen has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^4^ .

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s
  2   1     -1        +½        2p
  2   1     -1        -½        2p
  2   1     0         +½        2p
  2   1     +1        +½        2p

  :  Atomic Number: 8 Element: Oxygen

Adding another 2p electron gives us fluorine's configuration of 1s ^2^
2s ^2^ 2p ^5^ .

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s
  2   1     -1        +½        2p
  2   1     -1        -½        2p
  2   1     0         +½        2p
  2   1     0         -½        2p
  2   1     +1        +½        2p

  :  Atomic Number: 9 Element: Fluorine

Once we reach neon, a noble gas, all of the 2p orbitals will be
completely full. Neon has a configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ . Any
further electrons will need to go in the next highest energy orbital,
which would be the 3s orbital.

  n   *l*   *m ~l~*   *m ~s~*   Orbital Type
  --- ----- --------- --------- --------------
  1   0     0         +½        1s
  1   0     0         -½        1s
  2   0     0         +½        2s
  2   0     0         -½        2s
  2   1     -1        +½        2p
  2   1     -1        -½        2p
  2   1     0         +½        2p
  2   1     0         -½        2p
  2   1     +1        +½        2p
  2   1     +1        -½        2p

  :  Atomic Number: 10 Element: Neon

Electron configurations and orbital filling diagrams for lithium through
neon are provided in **Figure**
[below](#5.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDUtMjYtRWxlY3Ryb24tQ29uZmlndXJhdGlvbg..)
.

<div id="5.html#x-ck12-NDg4MGYzNWI2MzE4YzEwOGQ1ODBhNjRkMjVhOTk4ZmM.-jud"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_5_files/20151009235157750705.png)

**Figure 5.16**

Electron configurations of lithium through neon.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-pq3}

-   The locations where electrons are likely to be located around the
    nucleus are known as orbitals. Each orbital represents a
    three-dimensional region in which a given electron is most likely to
    be found.
-   We use four quantum numbers to describe the location of an electron
    within an atom. The first three quantum numbers describe the orbital
    that the electron occupies, and the fourth indicates the relative
    spin of the electron.
-   The principal quantum number, signified by (n), is the main energy
    level occupied by the electron.
-   The angular momentum quantum number, signified by ( *l* ), describes
    the general shape of the region in which an electron is likely to be
    found (the shape of its orbital).
-   The magnetic quantum momentum quantum number, signified by ( *m ~l~*
    ), describes the orientation of an orbital.
-   The spin quantum number, signified by ( *m ~s~* ), describes the
    spin for a given electron. Possible values include +½ or -½; an
    electron cannot have zero spin. We also represent spin with arrows:
    ↑ (spin up) or ↓ (spin down).
-   We can apply our knowledge of quantum numbers to describe the
    arrangement of electrons within an atom. We do this with something
    called electron configurations, which are effectively a map of the
    electrons for a given atom.

## Lesson Review Questions {#5.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-odb}

1.  State the four quantum numbers and the possible values they
    may have.
2.  Name the orbitals described by the following quantum numbers
    1.  n = 3, *l* = 0
    2.  n = 3, *l* = 1
    3.  n = 3, *l* = 2
    4.  n = 5, *l* = 0

3.  Give the n and *l* values for the following orbitals
    1.  1s
    2.  3s
    3.  2p
    4.  4d
    5.  5f

4.  Place the following orbitals in order of increasing energy: 1s, 3s,
    4s, 6s, 3d, 4f, 3p, 7s, 5d, 5p
5.  What are the possible *m ~l~* values for the following types of
    orbitals?
    1.  s
    2.  p
    3.  d
    4.  f

6.  How many possible orbitals are there for n =
    1.  2
    2.  4

7.  How many electrons can be accommodated by the full set of n = 4
    orbitals?
8.  Tabulate all of the possible orbitals (by name, i.e. 4s) for n = 4
    and give the three quantum numbers that define each orbital.
9.  Write electron configurations for the following atoms:
    1.  H
    2.  Li
    3.  N
    4.  F
    5.  Br

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#5.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-fvt}

-   The History of the Discovery of Radiation and Radioactivity:
    [http://mightylib.mit.edu/Course%20Materials/22.01/Fall%202001/discovery%20of%20radiation.pdf](discovery%20of%20radiation.pdf)
-   Quantum numbers:
    [http://www.etap.org/demo/chem1/instructiontutor\_last.html](instructiontutor_last.html)
-   Quantum Numbers and Electronic Configurations:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/ch6/quantum.html](quantum.html)

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686096] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#5.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-h7v}

1.  Courtesy of NOAA.
    [http://www.srh.noaa.gov/jetstream/remote/remote\_intro.htm](remote_intro.htm) .
    Public Domain
2.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
3.  User:Afrank99/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fotoelektrischer\_Effekt.svg](File:Fotoelektrischer_Effekt.svg) .
    Public Domain
4.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
5.  Radio antenna: Image copyright Baloncici, 2014; Longwave
    antenna: User:Junglecat/Wikipedia. [Radio antenna:
    http://www.shutterstock.com; Longwave antenna:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CB\_antenna.jpg](File:CB_antenna.jpg) .
    Radio antenna: Used under license from Shutterstock.com; Longwave
    antenna: Public Domain
6.  Christopher Auyeung, using emission spectra by
    User:Merikanto/Wikimedia Commons and
    User:Adrignola/Wikimedia Commons. [CK-12 Foundation; H spectrum:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Emission\_spectrum-H.svg](File:Emission_spectrum-H.svg) .
    CC BY-NC 3.0 (H emission spectra available under public domain)
7.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
8.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
9.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
10. Joanna Kośmider.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orbital\_s.svg](File:Orbital_s.svg) .
    Public Domain
11. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
12. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
13. Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
14. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
15. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
16. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="6.html"></span>

# The Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFBlcmlvZGljIFRhYmxl-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_6_files/20151009235202002688.png) </span>

Humans have had a strong interest in classifying and working with matter
throughout recorded history. Many of the elements that we are familiar
with today have been known since ancient times, such as gold (aurum),
silver (argentum), potassium (kalium), sodium (natrium), lead (plumbum),
and copper (cuprium). An element’s reactivity, solubility, flame color,
compound formation, and luster are just a few of the various
characteristics that people have studied and attempted to categorize. We
can use our knowledge of atomic number and atomic weight in conjunction
with these characteristics to arrange the elements systematically. In
fact, this was how the first versions of the periodic table were created
in the mid-1800s. Our modern day periodic table, pictured above, is an
evolution of these earlier works. In this chapter, we will be studying
how the periodic table of elements is organized and how it can be used
to predict certain properties about a given element.

^Christopher\\ Auyeung.\\ CK-12\\ Foundation.\\ CC\\ BY-NC\\ 3.0.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686098] -->

# History of the Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-SGlzdG9yeSBvZiB0aGUgUGVyaW9kaWMgVGFibGU.}

## Lesson Objectives {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-7si}

-   Describe the history of the periodic table and the contributions of
    Luther Meyer, John Newlands, Dmitri Mendeleev, Ernest Rutherford,
    and Henry Moseley.
-   Explain how the periodic table was originally organized and the
    inconsistencies in this first periodic table.
-   Describe the relationship between atomic number and atomic mass.
-   Describe our modern periodic table and how the elements
    are arranged.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-aeu}

-   **periodic law** : States that when elements are arranged in order
    of increasing atomic number, there is a periodic repetition of their
    chemical and physical properties.

## Check Your Understanding {#6.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-uwv}

1.  What is the atomic weight and atomic number of the following
    element?

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_6_files/20151009235202267700.png) </span>

2.  What do atomic number and atomic mass tell us?

## Introduction {#6.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-q2g}

The earliest versions of the periodic table of elements emerged in the
mid-1800s. At that time, there were approximately 60 known elements.
This table has evolved over time as additional elements have been
discovered and the known elements were arranged and categorized in
slightly different ways. Today, there are 118 known elements, which are
generally arranged in the familiar form of a modern periodic table.

## Atomic Mass and Periodic Properties {#6.html#x-ck12-QXRvbWljIE1hc3MgYW5kIFBlcmlvZGljIFByb3BlcnRpZXM.-3pk}

One of the major developments that allowed for what became known as the
periodic table was the discovery and measurements of atomic masses. With
this discovery, some characteristic properties of the elements could be
related to their relative atomic mass. This method for arranging the
elements began in the early 1800s when John Dalton (1766–1844) described
elements and compounds in terms of relative weights. Using the knowledge
available at the time, Dalton prepared an early version of what later
became the periodic table ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDYtMDEtRGFsdG9uLVRhYmxl) ).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-NWViODQ4ODI2YjcyOTM1MmY4YjhkMzVhZmI3M2MxMzU.-btw"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="John Dalton" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dalton%27s_Element_List.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235202383412.jpeg)

**Figure 6.1**

Dalton’s Table of the Elements

</div>

Following Dalton’s work, scientists began relating chemical properties
to atomic weight. This resulted in several major discoveries, which led
to the development of what we now know as the modern periodic table.

### Other Early Attempts at a Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-T3RoZXIgRWFybHkgQXR0ZW1wdHMgYXQgYSBQZXJpb2RpYyBUYWJsZQ..-eli}

Following the work of Dalton, a German scientist by the name of Julius
Lothar Meyer (1830–1895) created a table of elements that was organized
based on the concept of valency, which has to do with the ratios in
which one element combines with another to make a compound.

Meyer published a textbook in 1864 where he presented his table of
elements. Meyer’s table showed 28 elements systematically arranged by
valence into vertical columns. The atomic weights of these elements
increase by similar amounts when going stepwise from left to right
across the table. There were, however, some major shortcomings of
Meyer’s table. Only a fraction of the known elements could be easily
categorized by valence, due to the fact that many elements can combine
with one another in multiple different ratios (thus creating multiple
different chemical compounds).

Shortly after this, in 1865, a similar periodic table was published by
English chemist William Odling (1829–1921). Odling’s table described a
systematic arrangement of 45 elements. However, some elements were
omitted without any reasonable explanation, and this version of the
periodic table was quickly replaced by subsequent versions.

## The Law of Octaves {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIExhdyBvZiBPY3RhdmVz-eol}

Also in 1865, an English chemist by the name of John Newlands
(1837–1898) published another version of the periodic table ( **Table**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6TGF3LW9mLU9jdGF2ZXM.) ). The arrangement
was based on his proposed Law of Octaves, which stated that “if the
chemical elements are arranged according to increasing atomic weight,
those with similar physical and chemical properties occur after each
interval of seven elements.”

  H        Li   Ga      B        C    N        O
  -------- ---- ------- -------- ---- -------- --------
  F        Na   Mg      Al       Si   P        S
  Cl       K    Ca      Cr       Ti   Mn       Fe
  Co, Ni   Cu   Zn      Y        In   As       Se
  Br       Rb   Sr      Ce, La   Zr   Di, Mo   Ro, Ru
  Pd       Ag   Cd      U        Sn   Sb       Te
  I        Cs   Ba, V   Ta       W    Nb       Au
  Pt, Ir   Tl   Pb      Th       Hg   Bi       Th

  :  Newlands' Law of Octaves Octaves

Newlands was one of the first to detect a periodic pattern in the
properties of the elements and anticipated later developments of this
periodic law. However, Newlands' table, like Meyer's, did not gain
widespread acceptance and use, primarily because it required the
omission of several known elements without any real explanation, and few
testable predictions could be made from his proposals.

## Dmitri Mendeleev's Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-RG1pdHJpIE1lbmRlbGVldidzIFBlcmlvZGljIFRhYmxl-mdl}

At this point in history, the sharing of scientific information was not
as systematic as it is today, so multiple scientists could be working on
the same ideas in different parts of the world without even realizing
it. In 1869, Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev (1834–1907) independently
described an arrangement of about 60 elements based on increasing atomic
weight ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDYtMDYtTWVuZGVsZWV2LVRhYmxl) ).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-MjZiZGUzYTkyMjg2YmI5ZmJmYTlkOTk0NTc5NWU1NWE.-dls"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Dmitri Mendeleeev" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mendelejevs_periodiska_system_1871.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235202530718.png)

**Figure 6.2**

Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

</div>

Mendeleev’s table was similar to some of the other ones mentioned above,
but it gained more widespread acceptance, due in part to its predictions
of properties for elements that were not yet known. Rather than omitting
elements where the periodic trends did not seem to fit, he left
placeholders for elements that he predicted would eventually be
discovered. The predicted properties (including atomic mass, valence,
and melting points) of “eka-boron”, “eka-aluminum”, and “eka-silicon”
were found to be very close to those of the subsequently discovered
elements scandium (1879), gallium (1875), and germanium (1886). The
discoveries of these elements provided very strong evidence in support
of Mendeleev's table, and it provided the basis for our modern periodic
table of the elements.

Here is a short video describing Mendeleev’s discovery:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBroXfaavw0](watch?v=rBroXfaavw0)
(4:05).

[![](ck12_6_files/tmp93X2Xu.jpeg)](rBroXfaavw0%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D1100f2db4870f6faa9a97c6b1d0b1350)

Click on the image above for more content

## The Modern Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE1vZGVybiBQZXJpb2RpYyBUYWJsZQ..-qak}

In Mendeleev's table, atomic mass increases from top to bottom of
vertical columns, with successive columns going left to right. Elements
that are in the same horizontal row are groups of elements that were
known to exhibit similar chemical properties. However, even with the use
of placeholders, there were some elements that did not quite fit the
pattern. For example, Mendeleev listed tellurium before iodine even
though its atomic mass is higher, because he knew that the properties of
iodine were much more similar to those of fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl),
and bromine (Br) than they were to oxygen (O), sulfur (S), and selenium
(Se). He simply assumed that there was an error in the determination of
one or both of the atomic masses. This turned out not to be the case,
but Mendeleev was indeed correct to group these two elements as he did.

Recall that Rutherford’s experiments leading to the discovery of the
nucleus occurred in 1911, long after Mendeleev’s periodic table was
developed. Just two years later, in 1913, English physicist Henry
Moseley (1887-1915) examined the x-ray spectra of a number of chemical
elements. His results led to the definition of atomic number as the
number of protons contained in the nucleus of each atom. He then
realized that the elements of the periodic table should be arranged in
order of increasing atomic number instead of increasing atomic mass.

When ordered by atomic number, the discrepancies within Mendeleev’s
table disappeared. Tellurium has an atomic number of 52, while iodine
has an atomic number of 53. Even though tellurium does indeed have a
greater average atomic mass than iodine, it is properly placed before
iodine in the periodic table. Mendeleev and Moseley are credited with
formulating the modern **periodic law** , which states that when
elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic number, there is a
periodic repetition of their chemical and physical properties. We will
discuss some of these chemical and physical properties later on in this
chapter. The result is the periodic table as we know it today.

## Lesson Summary {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-dke}

-   The early versions of the periodic table included approximately 60
    known elements, while our current version includes 118.
-   An early version of the periodic table was first published by Julius
    Lothar Meyer in 1864, where he used the concept of valence to group
    similar elements together.
-   In 1865, Newlands described a periodic pattern in the properties of
    the elements that he referred to as the Law of Octaves. This
    anticipated later developments in our understanding of the
    periodic law.
-   Between 1869 and 1871, Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev
    systematically arranged 60 elements based on increasing
    atomic weight.
-   Mendeleev’s table became widely accepted, primarily because he
    predicted the characteristics and placement of elements which were
    yet to be discovered.
-   One of the major developments that allowed for what became known as
    the periodic table was the idea of atomic mass, which is attributed
    to John Dalton.
-   Characteristic properties of the elements could be related to atomic
    mass and atomic number.
-   Ordering the elements by atomic number instead of atomic mass
    cleared up some of the discrepancies found in older periodic tables
    and provided the basis for our current table of the elements.

## Lesson Review Questions {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-pfk}

1.  Create a timeline that shows the contributions from the various
    scientists which led to the evolution of the periodic table.
2.  What were some of the limitations of the early versions of the
    periodic table?
3.  What were some aspects of Mendeleev’s table that helped convince the
    scientific community to adopt its use?
4.  How was Mendeleev’s table arranged? What was systematic about it?
5.  What predictions did Mendeleev make with his table that were later
    confirmed?
6.  What contributions did Moseley make to the modern periodic table?
7.  The periodic table has evolved over time. Do you suppose it is a
    completed table at this point? In other words, will it evolve
    further in the future?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#6.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-ecj}

-   Barber, R. C., Karol, P. J., Nakahara, H., Vardaci, E., & Vogt, E.
    W. (2011). Discovery of the elements with atomic numbers greater
    than or equal to 113 (IUPAC Technical Report). Pure and Applied
    Chemistry, 83(7), 1485 - 1498.
-   Bonifácio, V. D. B. (2012). QR-Coded Audio Periodic Table of the
    Elements: A Mobile-Learning Tool. Journal of Chemical Education.
    doi: 10.1021/ed200541e
-   Hsu, D. D. (2012). Chemicool Dictionary, from
    [http://www.chemicool.com/dictionary.html](dictionary.html)
-   Gorin, G. (1996). Mendeleev and Moseley: The Principal Discoverers
    of the Periodic Law. Journal of Chemical Education, 73(6), 490. doi:
    10.1021/ed073p490
-   Trimble, R. F. (1981). Mendeleev's discovery of the periodic law.
    Journal of Chemical Education, 58(1), 28. doi: 10.1021/ed058p28
-   van Spronsen, J. W. (1969). The priority conflict between Mendeleev
    and Meyer. Journal of Chemical Education, 46(3), 136. doi:
    10.1021/ed046p136

## Points to Consider {#6.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-vof}

-   Even though the modern periodic table is a work in progress, there
    have been many other competing tables which have not been
    widely accepted. Research different periodic tables and see how they
    describe the periodic nature of the elements compared to the one
    with which we are most familiar.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686098] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686099] -->

# Electron Configuration and the Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb24gQ29uZmlndXJhdGlvbiBhbmQgdGhlIFBlcmlvZGljIFRhYmxl}

## Lesson Objectives {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-coq}

-   Distinguish between core and valence electrons
-   Understand the relationship between the number of orbitals in
    various energy sublevels and the length of the periods in the
    periodic table.
-   Identify each block of the periodic table and be able to determine
    which block each element belongs based on its
    electron configuration.
-   Describe the relationship between outer electron configuration and
    group number. Be able to determine the number of valence electrons
    for any element.
-   Locate the following groups of elements on the periodic table:
    alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, halogens, noble gases,
    transition elements, lanthanides, and actinides.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-c1t}

-   **valence electrons** : The electrons that are in the highest
    occupied principal energy level (n).
-   **core electrons** : The electrons that are closer to the nucleus
    and less available for interaction with other atoms.
-   **representative (main-group) elements** : elements that have the s
    and p sublevels for a given principal energy level.
-   **alkali metals** : The elements in Group 1 (lithium, sodium,
    potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium).
-   **alkaline earth metals** : The elements in Group 2 (beryllium,
    magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and radium).
-   **noble gases** : The elements of Group 18 (helium, neon, argon,
    krypton, xenon, and radon).
-   **halogens** : The elements of Group 17 (fluorine, chlorine,
    bromine, iodine, and astatine).
-   **transition elements** : The elements that are found in Groups 3-12
    on the periodic table.
-   **lanthanides** : The 14 elements from cerium (atomic number 58) to
    lutetium (atomic number 71).
-   **actinides** : The 14 elements from thorium (atomic number 90) to
    lawrencium (atomic number 103).

## Check Your Understanding {#6.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-wnt}

-   How to atoms form chemical bonds with one another? Are some elements
    more chemically reactive than others?

## Introduction {#6.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-2ja}

The development of the periodic table was largely based on elements that
display similar chemical behavior. In the modern table, these elements
are found in vertical columns called groups. In this lesson, you will
see how the form of the periodic table is related to electron
configurations, which in turn influences chemical reactivity. We will
first start with the following introductory video:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5MMWpeJ5dn4](watch?v=5MMWpeJ5dn4)
(3:51).

[![](ck12_6_files/tmpOfAKza.jpeg)](5MMWpeJ5dn4)

Click on the image above for more content

## Periods and Blocks {#6.html#x-ck12-UGVyaW9kcyBhbmQgQmxvY2tz_1-4di}

There are seven horizontal rows, or periods, on the periodic table. The
length of each period is determined by electron capacity of the
sublevels that fill during that period, as seen in **Table**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNi4x) .

  Period   Number of Elements in Period   Sublevels in Order of Filling
  -------- ------------------------------ -------------------------------
  1        2                              1s
  2        8                              2s 2p
  3        8                              3s 3p
  4        18                             4s 3d 4p
  5        18                             5s 4d 5p
  6        32                             6s 4f 5d 6p
  7        32                             7s 5f 6d 7p

  :  Period Length and Sublevels in the Periodic Table

Recall that the four different sublevels (s, p, d, and f) each consist
of a different number of orbitals. The s sublevel has one orbital, the p
sublevel has three orbitals, the d sublevel has five orbitals, and the f
sublevel has seven orbitals. In the first period, only the 1s sublevel
is being filled. Since all orbitals can hold two electrons, the entire
first period consists of just two elements. In the second period, the 2s
sublevel, with two electrons, and the 2p sublevel, with six electrons,
are being filled. Consequently, the second period contains eight
elements. The third period is similar to the second, except the 3s and
3p sublevels are being filled. Because the 3d sublevel does not fill
until after the 4s sublevel, the fourth period contains 18 elements, due
to the 10 additional electrons that can be accommodated by the 3d
orbitals. The fifth period is similar to the fourth. After the 6s
sublevel fills, the 4f sublevel is populated with up to 14 electrons.
This is followed by the 5d and the 6p sublevels. The total number of
elements in the sixth period is 32. The seventh period also contains 32
elements, most of which are too unstable to be found in nature. All 32
have been detected or synthesized, although for some of the later
elements in this period, only a handful of atoms have ever been made.

The period to which a given element belongs can easily be determined
from its electron configuration. As an example, consider the element
nickel (Ni). Its electron configuration is \[Ar\]3d ^8^ 4s ^2^ . The
highest occupied principal energy level is the fourth, as indicated by
the 4 in the 4s ^2^ portion of the configuration. Therefore, nickel can
be found in the fourth period of the periodic table. **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtOS1QZXJpb2RpYy1UYWJsZQ..) shows a
version of the periodic table that includes abbreviated electron
configurations.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ZGIyM2Y4NWQ3ODZjZmY3Y2ViNDIyYzAyMzU2YzBiZWE.-rj1"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235202686664.png)

**Figure 6.3**

This periodic table shows the outer electron configurations of the
elements.

</div>

Based on electron configurations, the periodic table can be divided into
blocks denoting which sublevel is in the process of being filled. The s,
p, d, and f blocks are illustrated in **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTAtQmxvY2tz) .

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-NGMxOWY3Y2Y0NDM3YjFhMTZhOTZkNzZkNTY3ZWQ4YzM.-d8a"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung and Joy Sheng" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235202906836.png)

**Figure 6.4**

A block diagram of the periodic table shows which sublevels are being
filled at any point.

</div>

**Figure** [above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTAtQmxvY2tz) also
illustrates how the d sublevel is always one principal level behind the
period in which that sublevel occurs. In other words, the 3d sublevels
fills during the fourth period. The f sublevel is always two levels
behind. The 4f sublevel belongs to the sixth period.

## Numbering the Periodic Groups {#6.html#x-ck12-TnVtYmVyaW5nIHRoZSBQZXJpb2RpYyBHcm91cHM._1-aog}

The vertical columns, or groups, of the periodic table contain elements
that exhibit similar properties. Two different ways of numbering the
groups are commonly in use. The currently preferred convention is to
number each column of the periodic table from 1-18. Group 1 includes
hydrogen, lithium and sodium, and group 18 includes helium, neon, argon,
and krypton. An older method is to skip the d and f blocks and utilize
Roman numerals from IA to VIIIA. The letter A differentiates these
groups from the d block groups, which are numbered using the letter B
(from IB to VIIIB). For example, the element carbon could be described
as being part of group 14 or group IVA, while scandium is in group 3 or
group IIIB.

## Valence Electrons {#6.html#x-ck12-VmFsZW5jZSBFbGVjdHJvbnM._1-rdx}

Because they are held more loosely to the nucleus than the inner
electrons, it is the outermost electrons that dictate the chemical
behavior of a given element. Specifically, much can be predicted about
the chemical reactivity of a given element based solely on the number of
electrons in its highest occupied principal energy level (n). These
electrons are referred to as **valence electrons** . The remaining
electrons, which are closer to the nucleus and less available for
interaction with other atoms, are referred to as **core electrons** .

Consider the element magnesium, which has 12 electrons in a
configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ . The highest occupied
principal energy level is 3, so all electrons with a quantum number of n
= 3 are valence electrons. Thus, magnesium has two valence electrons.
The other 10 electrons (in the n = 1 and n = 2 levels) are its core
electrons.

## Representative Elements {#6.html#x-ck12-UmVwcmVzZW50YXRpdmUgRWxlbWVudHM._1-koh}

We will now examine each block of the periodic table in more detail. The
s and p sublevels for a given principal energy level are filled during
the correspondingly numbered period. For example, the 2s and 2p
sublevels fill during the second period. The s-block elements and the
p-block elements are together called the **representative** or
**main-group elements** .

### The s-block {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIHMtYmxvY2s._1-qtu}

The s-block consists of the elements in Group 1 and Group 2, which are
primarily composed of highly reactive metals. The elements in Group 1
(lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium) are called
the **alkali metals** . All of the alkali metals have a single s
electron in their valence energy level. The general form for the
electron configuration of each alkali metal is *n* s ^1^ , where the *n*
refers to the highest occupied principal energy level. For example, the
electron configuration of lithium (Li), the alkali metal of Period 2, is
1s ^2^ 2s ^1^ . This single valence electron is what gives the alkali
metals their extreme reactivity. **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTEtU29kaXVt) shows the alkali metal
element sodium.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ODdmMjlkNjc1ZTM3ODEzYzhlYTcxOGNlMzlkYjcxMWI.-4bd"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of the US Department of Energy" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.etec.energy.gov/Operations/Sodium/Sodium_Index.html" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203031485.jpeg)

**Figure 6.5**

Like all alkali metals, sodium is very soft. A fresh surface, which can
be exposed by cutting the sample, exhibits a luster that is quickly lost
as the sodium reacts with air.

</div>

All alkali metals are very soft and can be cut easily with a knife. Due
to their high reactivity, they must be stored under oil to prevent them
from reacting with oxygen or water vapor in the air. The reactions
between alkali metals and water are particularly vigorous and include
the rapid production of large quantities of hydrogen gas. Alkali metals
also react easily with most nonmetals. All of the alkali metals are far
too reactive to be found in nature in their pure elemental form. For
example, all naturally occurring sodium exists as a compound, such as
sodium chloride (table salt).

The elements in Group 2 (beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium,
barium, and radium) are called the **alkaline earth metals** (see
**Figure** [below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTItQWxrYWxpbmUtRWFydGg.)
). These elements have two valence electrons, both of which reside in
the outermost s sublevel. The general electron configuration of all
alkaline earth metals is *n* s ^2^ . The alkaline earth metals are still
too reactive to exist in nature as free elements, but they are less
reactive than the alkali metals. They tend to be harder, stronger, and
denser than the alkali metals, and they also form numerous compounds
with nonmetals.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-NzIwMjQyYzQ2ODU0YTA2NTVmZmZjYWM1NzNmZjAxYTE.-nsg"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements" -->
<!-- @@url="Be: http://images-of-elements.com/beryllium.php; Mg: http://images-of-elements.com/magnesium.php; Ca: http://images-of-elements.com/calcium.php; Sr: http://images-of-elements.com/strontium.php; Ba: http://images-of-elements.com/barium.php" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203155489.jpeg)

**Figure 6.6**

The alkaline earth metals include beryllium, magnesium, calcium,
strontium, and barium. Strontium and barium react with air and must be
stored in oil.

</div>

### Hydrogen and Helium {#6.html#x-ck12-SHlkcm9nZW4gYW5kIEhlbGl1bQ.._1-vro}

Looking at the block diagram ( **Figure**
[above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTAtQmxvY2tz) ), you may be wondering
why hydrogen and helium were not included in our discussion of the
alkali metal and alkaline earth metal groups. Though hydrogen, with its
1s ^1^ configuration, appears as though it should be similar to the rest
of Group 1, it does not share the properties of that group. Hydrogen is
a unique element that cannot be reasonably included in any single group
of the periodic table. Some periodic tables even separate hydrogen’s
square from the rest of Group 1 to indicate its solitary status.

Helium has a configuration of 1s ^2^ , which would seem to place it with
the alkaline earth metals. However, it is instead placed in Group 18 at
the far right of the periodic table. The elements in this group, called
the noble gases, are very unreactive because their outermost s and p
sublevels are completely filled. Since it is part of the first period,
helium does not have a p sublevel. Its filled 1s sublevel makes it very
similar to the other members of Group 18.

### The p-block {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIHAtYmxvY2s._1-kxq}

The p-block consists of the elements in groups 13-18. The p sublevel
always fills after the s sublevel of a given principal energy level.
Therefore, the general electron configuration for an element in the *p*
-block is *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^1-6^ . For example, the electron
configuration of elements in Group 13 is *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^1^ , the
configuration of elements in Group 15 is *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^3^ , and so
on. The elements of Group 18 (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and
radon) are called the **noble gases** . They are an especially important
group of the periodic table because they are almost completely
unreactive, due to their completely filled outermost s and p sublevels.
As noted above, helium might at first seem to be out of place, because
it has a configuration of 1s ^2^ instead of the *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^6^
configuration that is characteristic of the other noble gases. However,
because there are no 1p orbitals, helium also has a completely filled
outermost energy level, which leads to the various chemical properties
exhibited by the other noble gases.

Note that the noble gases were not a part of Mendeleev’s periodic table
because they had not yet been discovered. In 1894, English physicist
Lord Rayleigh and Scottish chemist Sir William Ramsay detected argon as
a small percentage of the atmosphere. Discovery of the other noble gases
soon followed. The group was originally called the *inert gases* because
they were believed to be completely unreactive and unable form
compounds. However, beginning in the early 1960s, several compounds of
xenon were synthesized by treating it with highly reactive fluorine gas.
The name of the group was later changed to noble gases.

The number of valence electrons in elements of the p-block is equal to
the group number minus 10. As an example, sulfur is located in Group 16,
so it has 16 – 10 = 6 valence electrons. Since sulfur is located in
period 3, its outer electron configuration is 3s ^2^ 3p ^4^ . In the
older system of labeling groups, the representative elements are
designated IA through VIIIA. Using this system, the number of valence
electrons is equal to the number preceding the letter A. Using the same
example, sulfur is a member of Group VIA, so it has 6 valence electrons.

The elements of Group 17 (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and
astatine) are called the **halogens** . The halogens all have the
general electron configuration *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^5^ , giving them seven
valence electrons. They are one electron short of having full outer s
and p sublevels, which makes them very reactive. They undergo especially
vigorous reactions with the reactive alkali metals. In their pure
elemental forms, chlorine and fluorine are gases at room temperature,
bromine is a dark orange liquid, and iodine is a dark purple-gray solid.
Astatine is so rare that its properties are mostly unknown.

## Transition Elements {#6.html#x-ck12-VHJhbnNpdGlvbiBFbGVtZW50cw.._1-bjz}

**Transition elements** are the elements that are found in Groups 3-12
on the periodic table. The d sublevel, which becomes increasingly filled
from left to right across the period, is in a lower principal energy
level than the s sublevel filled before it. For example, the electron
configuration of scandium, the first transition element, is \[Ar\]3d ^1^
4s ^2^ . Remember that the configuration is not written in the same
order as the sublevels are filled; the 4s sublevel gets filled before
electrons are placed into 3d orbitals. Because they are all metals, the
transition elements are often called the transition metals ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTQtVHJhbnNpdGlvbi1NZXRhbHM.) ). As a
group, they display typical metallic properties but are less reactive
than the metals in Groups 1 and 2. Some of the more familiar transition
metals are unreactive enough to be found in nature as pure elements,
such as platinum, gold, and silver.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-NTliNzkwNjIyYTg2M2E4NTVkMjI2OGI5NmFhZjQxZDI.-zkb"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements" -->
<!-- @@url="Silver: http://images-of-elements.com/silver.php; Chromium: http://images-of-elements.com/chromium.php" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203270015.png)

**Figure 6.7**

Silver ( *left* ) and chromium ( *right* ) are two typical transition
metals.

</div>

Many transition elements make compounds that are distinctive for being
vividly colored. Electron transitions that occur within the d sublevel
absorb some of the wavelengths present in white light, and the
wavelengths that are not absorbed are perceived by observers as the
color of the compound ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTUtQ29sb3Jz) ).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-YjMxZjI4ZTJiZWY4ZTQ4YjNmMDNkMmNiNmIwMGYxOTc.-fbh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coloured-transition-metal-solutions.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203400369.jpeg)

**Figure 6.8**

Transition metal compounds dissolved in water exhibit a wide variety of
bright colors. From left to right are shown solutions of cobalt(II)
nitrate, potassium dichromate, potassium chromate, nickel(II) chloride,
copper(II) sulfate, and potassium permanganate.

</div>

### The d-block {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIGQtYmxvY2s._1-iaw}

The transition elements found in Groups 3-12 are also referred to as the
d-block, since the d sublevel is in the process of being filled across
the d-block from left to right. Since there are five d orbitals, each of
which can accommodate two electrons, there are ten elements in each
period of the d-block. The general electron configuration for elements
in the d-block is ( *n* - 1)d ^1-10^ *n* s ^2^ . The d sublevel being
filled belongs to a principal energy level that is one lower than the s
sublevel that has just been filled. For example, the configuration of
zirconium (Zr) is \[Kr\]4d ^2^ 5s ^2^ . The group number can easily be
determined from the combined number of electrons in the *s* and *d*
sublevels. Zirconium is in Period 5 and Group 4.

Because electrons in the d sublevel do not belong to the outermost
principal energy level, they are not valence electrons. Most d-block
elements have two valence electrons, which are the two electrons from
the outermost s sublevel.

### The f-block {#6.html#x-ck12-VGhlIGYtYmxvY2s._1-wbx}

The first of the f sublevels is the 4f sublevel. It fills after the 6s
sublevel, meaning that f sublevels are two principal energy levels
behind. The general electron configuration for elements in the f-block
is ( *n* - 2)f ^1-14^ *n* s ^2^ . The seven orbitals of the f sublevel
can each accommodate two electrons, so the f-block is 14 elements in
length. It is usually shown pulled out of the main body of the periodic
table and is placed at the very bottom. Because of that, the elements of
the f-block do not belong to any of the numbered groups; they are wedged
in between Groups 3 and 4. The **lanthanides** are the 14 elements from
cerium (atomic number 58) to lutetium (atomic number 71). Most
lanthanides have a partially filled 4f sublevel. They are all metals and
are similar in reactivity to the Group 2 alkaline earth metals.

The **actinides** are the 14 elements from thorium (atomic number 90) to
lawrencium (atomic number 103). Most actinides have a partially filled
5f sublevel. The actinides are all radioactive elements, and only the
first four have been found to occur naturally on Earth. All of the
others have only been artificially made in the laboratory.

## Lesson Summary {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-uvp}

-   An element’s placement in the periodic table is determined by its
    electron configuration.
-   Valence electrons (those in the outermost principal energy level)
    dictate the chemical behavior of each element. Their relatively
    large distance from the nucleus makes them more available to
    interact with other atoms.
-   Core electrons are the electrons that are closer to the nucleus and
    therefore do not participate in bonding.
-   The periodic table is divided into 4 blocks (s, p, d, and f) based
    on which sublevel is in the process of being filled.
-   Alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, halogens, and noble gases are
    the common names of groups 1, 2, 17, and 18.
-   Transition elements are members of the d-block, while the f-block
    consists of the lanthanides and the actinides.

## Lesson Review Questions {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-p1e}

1.  Sketch a periodic table, labeling the s, p, d and f blocks.
2.  What can be said about the elements within a given group of the
    periodic table?
3.  How do valence electrons and core electrons differ?
4.  What blocks of the periodic table make up the representative
    elements?
5.  Describe the relationship between the electron configuration of the
    alkali earth metals and their reactivity.
6.  How do alkaline earth metals differ from the alkali metals?
7.  Describe the properties of hydrogen and helium?
8.  Why are the noble gases almost completely unreactive?
9.  What are some unique properties of transition metals?
10. What block to the lanthanides and actinides belong to?
11. Use a periodic table to identify the block in which each of the
    following elements would be found.
    1.  rubidium
    2.  holmium
    3.  palladium
    4.  tellurium

12. Write the electron configurations for the following elements:
    1.  Na
    2.  Cl
    3.  Zr

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#6.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-k5d}

-   Winter, M. (1993-2011). WebElements: the periodic table on the WWW,
    from [http://www.webelements.com/]()

## Points to Consider {#6.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-nhm}

-   Archaeological evidence suggests that people have been using tin for
    at least 5500 years. Tin is used to form many useful alloys
    (mixtures of two or more metals). Bronze is an alloy of tin and
    copper, while solder is an alloy of tin and lead.
-   Gallium melts near room temperature and has one of the largest
    liquid ranges of any metal, so it has found use in high
    temperature thermometers.
-   Lead is a soft, malleable, and corrosion resistant material. The
    ancient Romans used lead to make water pipes, some of which are
    still in use today.
-   Can you think of other elements which have similar uses to those
    listed here?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686099] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686100] -->

# Trends in the Periodic Table {#6.html#x-ck12-VHJlbmRzIGluIHRoZSBQZXJpb2RpYyBUYWJsZQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-6xs}

-   Describe what a noble gas configuration is and explain how elements
    react by losing, gaining, or sharing electrons to achieve a noble
    gas configuration.
-   Define cation and anion, and explain the relationship between the
    number of electrons typically lost for a particular element and its
    position on the periodic table.
-   Describe how ions are formed, and explain why it is easier to remove
    valence electrons than core electrons.
-   Define atomic radius and describe the trend of atomic radius across
    a period and down a group of the periodic table.
-   Define ionic radius and describe how and why ionic radius differs
    for cations and anions. Describe the trends in ionic radius.
-   Define ionization energy and describe how and why ionization energy
    differs for cations and anions. Describe the trend in ionization
    energy across a period and down a group of the periodic table.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-b2p}

-   **atomic radius** : The distance from an atom's nucleus to the
    electrons in the outermost orbitals.
-   **ion** : An atom or group of bonded atoms that has a positive or
    negative charge.
-   **cation** : A positively charged ion.
-   **anion** : A negatively charged ion.
-   **ionization energy** : The energy required to remove an electron
    from an atom.
-   **electron shielding** : When outer electrons are partially shielded
    from the attractive force of the protons in the nucleus by
    inner electrons.
-   **isoelectronic** : Two atoms or ions with the same number of
    electrons and therefore the same electron configurations.
-   **electron affinity** : The amount of energy required for an
    electron to be added to a neutral atom in gas form.
-   **ionic radius** : A measure of the size of an atom that is helpful
    in comparing the size of an ion to that of the parent atom.
-   **electronegativity** : A measure of the ability of an atom to
    attract shared electrons when the atom is part of a compound.
-   **metal** : An element that is a good conductor of heat
    and electricity.
-   **nonmetal** : An element that is generally a poor conductor of heat
    and electricity.
-   **metalloid** : An element with properties that are intermediate
    between those of metals and nonmetals.

## Check Your Understanding {#6.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-wdo}

1.  Write the electron configurations for the following atoms:
    1.  Xe
    2.  Pb

2.  How do you determine the number of valence electrons for a given
    atom?

## Introduction {#6.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-q8p}

In the last section, we studied the relationship between an element’s
behavior and its location on the periodic table. The characteristics of
an element are largely described by the configuration of its valence
electrons. In this section, we are going to look at specific properties
that can be predicted by an element's position on the periodic table.
Additionally, we will look at the formation of ions, including how to
predict which ions are likely to form and which are not.

## Atomic Radius {#6.html#x-ck12-QXRvbWljIFJhZGl1cw.._2-kya}

One important characteristic that determines the way in which elements
behave is the total size of each atom. Free atoms are spherical in
shape, so the relative sizes of the elements can be compared by looking
at each atom's **atomic radius** , which is the distance from an atom's
nucleus to the electrons in the outermost orbitals. You might expect
atoms to generally grow larger as they go up in atomic number (which is
equal to the total number of electrons in the neutral atom). Indeed, if
you look at a single group of the periodic table, this trend holds true.
Iodine is larger than bromine, which is in turn larger than chlorine and
fluorine. In the case of a single group, each successive row places
electrons in a higher principal energy level. Since higher energy levels
are farther from the nucleus on average, this results in a larger total
volume occupied by the atom.

However, when going across a period from left to right, the atomic
radius actually tends to decrease. Why is this so? Each successive
electron is going into the same principal energy level as the previous
one, so the total amount of occupied space does not really go up
significantly. Additionally, because protons are also added to the
nucleus as you go across the row, the pull of the positively charged
nucleus on the negatively charged electrons increases. This tighter pull
leads to a slight decrease in atomic radius. As a result, the atomic
radii of the elements exhibit a periodic trend, gradually tends to
downward, but with a sharp spike up whenever electrons are added to a
new principal energy level ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDYtMDktQXRvbWljLVJhZGlp) ).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-M2MwZTMzNTRmODY4OTcwNjkzZjBmZDRkMGU2Nzk2MWY.-ux8"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203527041.png)

**Figure 6.9**

Atomic radii of the main group elements (pm).

</div>

## Forming Ions {#6.html#x-ck12-Rm9ybWluZyBJb25z_2-hhp}

An **ion** is an atom or group of bonded atoms that has a positive or
negative charge. Ions are formed when an atom gains or loses electrons
from its valence shell ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMTktSW9ucw..) ). This process causes
an imbalance between the number of positively charged protons and
negatively charged electrons, so the overall ion will carry a net
positive or negative charge.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-p5i"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203625597.png)

**Figure 6.10**

</div>

When an atom loses one or more electrons, it becomes positively charged,
because it now has more protons than electrons. A positively charged ion
is called a **cation** . The charge for a cation is written as a
numerical superscript after the chemical symbol, followed by a plus
sign. If the ion carries a single unit of charge, the number “1” is
assumed and is not written. For example, a sodium atom that loses one
electron becomes a sodium ion, which is written as Na ^+^ . A magnesium
atom that loses two electrons becomes a magnesium ion, which is written
as Mg ^2+^ . This magnesium ion carries a 2+ charge because it now has
two more protons than electrons.

When an atom gains one or more electrons, it becomes negatively charged,
because it now has more electrons than protons. A negatively charged ion
is called an **anion** . The charge of an anion is written in the same
way as the charge of a cation, except a minus sign is used instead of a
plus sign. A chlorine atom that gains one electron becomes Cl ^-^ , and
a sulfur atom that gains two electrons becomes S ^2-^ .

It is important to realize that atoms become ions only when the number
of electrons increases or decreases. The number of protons and neutrons
is not changing. Therefore the reactivity of the element may change as
the valence shell configuration is changing, but the element itself
remains the same.

### Noble Gas Configurations {#6.html#x-ck12-Tm9ibGUgR2FzIENvbmZpZ3VyYXRpb25z_2-e7a}

How can we predict the number of electrons that an element is likely to
gain or lose in order to form a stable ion? To answer that, we look to
the noble gases. Certain physical and chemical properties were found to
repeat themselves in a regular pattern when the elements are arranged by
their atomic number. For example, the elements on the far left of the
periodic table (groups 1 and 2) tend to be quite reactive in their pure
form, whereas the elements in group 18 (the noble gases) are almost
completely unreactive. Because they are so unlikely to react with other
chemical substances, most of them were discovered quite a bit later than
the elements just before and after them on the periodic table. This lack
of reactivity can largely be explained by electron configurations. The
configurations of the noble gas elements are shown in **Table**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6Tm9ibGUtR2FzZXM.) .

  Element (Symbol)   Electron configuration
  ------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  helium (He)        1s ^2^
  neon (Ne)          1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^
  argon (Ar)         1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^
  krypton (Kr)       1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^ 3d ^10^ 4s ^2^ 4p ^6^
  xenon (Xe)         1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^ 3d ^10^ 4s ^2^ 4p ^6^ 4d ^10^ 5s ^2^ 5p ^6^
  radon (Rn)         1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^ 3d ^10^ 4s ^2^ 4p ^6^ 4d ^10^ 5s ^2^ 5p ^6^ 4f ^14^ 5d ^10^ 6s ^2^ 6p ^6^

  :  Electron Configurations of the Noble Gases

Except for helium, each of these elements has a configuration of *n* s
^2^ *n* p ^6^ in its highest occupied principal energy level. In other
words, each noble gas has 8 valence electrons, sometimes referred to as
a complete octet. Having completely filled s and p orbitals in the
outermost energy level represents an especially stable configuration, so
noble gases have very little driving force to react any further.
Conversely, other elements will readily gain, lose, or share electrons
in order to achieve a stable octet of valence electrons. The number of
electrons that needs to be lost or gained in order for this to occur
helps us to predict the charges of ions formed by the main group
elements.

Helium may seem to be an exception, since it has only two valence
electrons. This has to do with the fact that the n = 1 energy level has
one s orbital and no p orbitals. As a result, the first energy level can
be completely filled by just two electrons. It is the presence of a
filled valence shell that gives noble gases their unusual stability, not
anything intrinsic about the number 8. In addition to helium, the first
few elements such as lithium, beryllium, and boron, have a particularly
stable configuration with a pair of valence electrons rather that an
octet.

## Ionization Energy {#6.html#x-ck12-SW9uaXphdGlvbiBFbmVyZ3k._2-isy}

To make an electron jump from a lower energy level to a higher energy
level, there must be an input of energy. Removing the electron from the
atom entirely requires even more energy. This is called an ionization
process. **Ionization energy** is the energy required to remove an
electron from an atom (X → X ^+^ + e ^-^ ). An equation can be written
to illustrate this process for a sodium atom.

<dl id="x-ck12-b1f">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-now">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-k6g">
<dd>
![\\text{Na} + \\text{energy} \\rightarrow \\text{Na}\^+ +
e\^-](ck12_math_images_dir/0278904fa3788c084063431b1766314a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The equation shows that energy added to a sodium atom results in a
sodium ion plus the removed electron (e ^-^ ). The lost electron is
always a valence electron. This is because the electrons in the
outermost principal energy level are furthest from the nucleus and are
therefore the easiest to remove. The ionization energies of various
elements ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjAtSW9uaXphdGlvbg..) ) are
influenced by the size of the atom, the nuclear charge, and the electron
energy levels. Ionization energies are measured in units of kilojoules
per mole (kJ/mol).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ODQwYjg1NGJkNGE3ZWYzOGUwYzYzZmI3NzA3MjhhNWI.-pi1"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203742446.png)

**Figure 6.11**

A periodic table showing the first ionization energies of the elements
in units of kJ/mol.

</div>

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-OGM2MjJmZTAyOWE0NDEyYTc0Y2VkOTBkMWYzYTIzYzI.-ced"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:JJnoDog/De.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IonizationEnergyAtomicWeight.PNG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235203898496.png)

**Figure 6.12**

Graph of first ionization energy plotted against atomic number.

</div>

As can be seen from **Figures**
[above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjAtSW9uaXphdGlvbg..) and
[above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjEtVHJlbmRz) , the ionization energy
of atoms generally increases from left to right across each row of the
periodic table. The reason for this increase in ionization energy is the
increase in nuclear charge. A nucleus containing more protons has a
larger total positive charge, which results in a greater attractive
force being applied to each electron. If the valence electrons are held
more tightly to the nucleus by this stronger force, they are more
difficult to remove, and more ionization energy is required.

However, there are periodic drops in ionization energy that correspond
to electrons being added into a new, higher principal energy level. This
is due to a concept called **electron shielding** . Outer electrons are
partially shielded from the attractive force of the protons in the
nucleus on inner electrons ( **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjItU2hpZWxkaW5n) ).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-YmM1YTlkOGNmMmI2ODc3MDI4NzgzOTk2OGJlMTYwNzY.-rqs"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204012075.png)

**Figure 6.13**

The interior electron cloud (in green) shields the outer electrons from
the full attractive force of the nucleus. A larger shielding effect
results in a decrease in ionization energy.

</div>

To explain how shielding works, consider a lithium atom, which has three
protons and three electrons. Two of its electrons are in the first
principal energy level, and its valence electron is in the second. The
valence electron is partially shielded from the attractive force of the
nucleus by the two inner electrons. Removing that valence electron is
easier because of this shielding effect.

The ionization energies of the representative elements generally
decrease from top to bottom within a group. This trend is explained by
the increase in size of the atoms within a group. The valence electron
that is being removed is further from the nucleus in the case of a
larger atom. The attractive force between the valence electron and the
nucleus weakens as the distance between them increases and as the
shielding effect increases, resulting in a lower ionization energy for
the larger atoms within a group. Although the nuclear charge is
increased for larger atoms, the shielding effect also increases due to
the presence of a larger number of inner electrons. This is particularly
easy to see in the alkali metals, where the single valence electron is
shielded by all of the inner core electrons.

### Multiple Ionizations {#6.html#x-ck12-TXVsdGlwbGUgSW9uaXphdGlvbnM._2-kfh}

So far, we have described first ionization energy and its trends for
various atoms. However, in many cases, multiple electrons can be removed
from an atom. If an atom loses two electrons, it acquires a 2+ charge.
If an atom loses three electrons, it acquires a 3+ charge, and so on.
The energies required for subsequent ionizations are called the second
ionization energy (IE ~2~ ), the third ionization energy (IE ~3~ ), and
so on. The first six ionization energies are shown for the elements of
the first three periods in **Table**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNi4z) .

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNi4z">

[![](images/table.png)](table_6-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

Notice that the second ionization energy of an element is always higher
than the first, the third is always higher than the second, and so on.
This is because after one ionization, a positively charged ion is
formed. At this point, there is a greater overall attractive force on
the remaining electrons, because the protons now outnumber the
electrons. Removing a second electron is therefore more difficult.

The first ionization energies for the noble gases (He, Ne, Ar) are
higher than those of any other element within that period. The noble
gases have full outer s and p sublevels, which gives them extra
stability and makes them mostly unreactive. As we discussed above, the
stability of the noble gas electron configuration applies to other
elements as well. Consider the element lithium, which has a
configuration of 1s ^2^ 2s ^1^ . As an alkali metal, its first
ionization energy is very low. After it loses its valence electron (the
2s electron), it becomes a lithium ion, Li ^+^ , which has an electron
configuration of 1s ^2^ . This is the electron configuration of the
noble gas helium. We say that the Li ^+^ ion and the helium atom are
**isoelectronic** , indicating that they have the same electron
configuration. The second ionization energy of lithium (bold in the
**Table** [above](#6.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNi4z) ) shows an
extremely large jump compared to the first because the removal of a
second electron requires breaking apart the noble gas electron
configuration. The pattern continues across each period of the table.
Beryllium shows a large jump after IE ~2~ , boron after IE ~3~ , and so
on.

## Electron Affinity {#6.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb24gQWZmaW5pdHk._2-c6s}

**Electron affinity** is the amount of energy required for an electron
to be added to a neutral atom in gas form. In most cases, the formation
of an anion by the addition of an electron to a neutral atom releases
energy. This can be shown for chloride ion formation below:

<dl id="x-ck12-f8c">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gno">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ny2">
<dd>
![\\text{Cl} + e\^- \\rightarrow \\text{Cl}\^- +
\\text{energy}](ck12_math_images_dir/6533c90124d8dcc4ad18dba0cf296b88.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
When energy is released in a chemical reaction or process, that energy
is expressed as a negative number. **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjQtRWxlY3Ryb24tQWZmaW5pdGllcw..)
shows electron affinities in kJ/mol for the main group elements.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ZjY1OWRkYzkxNzAyODMwYTAwMTJjOGYwOGFhMTQ1ZTM.-rcp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204152411.png)

**Figure 6.14**

Electron affinities (in kJ/mol) for representative elements in the first
five periods. Electron affinities are written as negative numbers
because energy is being released.

</div>

The elements of the halogen group (Group 17) gain electrons most
readily, as can be seen from their large negative electron affinities.
This means that more energy is released in the formation of a halide ion
than for the anions of any other elements. Considering electron
configuration, it is easy to see why. The outer configuration of all
halogens is *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^5^ . The addition of one more electron
gives the halide ions the same electron configuration as a noble gas,
which we have seen is particularly stable.

Period and group trends for electron affinities are not nearly as
regular as those for ionization energy. In general, electron affinities
increase (become more negative) from left to right across a period and
decrease (become less negative) from top to bottom down a group.
However, there are many exceptions.

## Ionic Radius {#6.html#x-ck12-SW9uaWMgUmFkaXVz_2-an0}

The **ionic radius** is helpful in comparing the size of an ion to the
size of its parent atom. **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjUtSW9uaWMtU2l6ZXM.) compares the
radii of commonly formed ions to the sizes of their parent atoms for
Groups 1, 2, 13, 16 and 17. The atoms are shown in gray. Groups 1, 2,
and 13 are metals that lose electrons to form cations, which are shown
in green. Groups 16 and 17 are nonmetals that gain electrons to form
anions, which are shown in purple.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ZTYwY2E0NmQzNDdlMGEwM2VkOGI5MTcxOGMyM2E5Zjk.-ofj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204261260.png)

**Figure 6.15**

Atomic and ionic radii of the first five elements in Groups 1, 2, 13,
16, and 17. Atoms are shown in gray. The most common ion for each
element is shown in either green (for cations) or purple (for anions).

</div>

The removal of electrons always results in a cation that is smaller than
the parent atom. This is true for any cation because the remaining
electrons are drawn closer to the nucleus, now that the protons
outnumber the electrons. Additionally, if all of the valence electrons
from a given atom are removed, the resulting ion has one fewer occupied
principal energy levels, so the electron cloud that remains is
considerably smaller.

The addition of electrons always results in an anion that is larger than
the parent atom. More electrons results in greater electron-electron
repulsions, and without any additional protons to cancel this effect,
the electron cloud spreads out over a larger volume to minimize
repulsive interactions.

## Electronegativity {#6.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb25lZ2F0aXZpdHk._2-nwe}

Valence electrons of both atoms are always involved when those two atoms
come together to form a chemical bond. Chemical bonds are the basis for
how elements combine with one another to form compounds. When these
chemical bonds form, atoms of some elements have a greater ability to
attract the valence electrons involved in the bond than other elements.
**Electronegativity** is a measure of the ability of an atom to attract
shared electrons when the atom is part of a compound. Electronegativity
differs from electron affinity because electron affinity is a measure of
the actual energy released when an atom gains an electron. In contrast,
electronegativity is a relative scale, so it is not measured in units of
energy. All elements are compared to one another, and the most
electronegative element, fluorine, is assigned an electronegativity
value of 3.98. Fluorine attracts shared electrons better than any other
element. **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjYtRWxlY3Ryb25lZ2F0aXZpdHk.) shows
the electronegativity values of most elements.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-NDg2YzY0NjkyNTk2NmQwZTNiY2RmZTE4MjBkYmUzY2E.-x7i"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204402426.png)

**Figure 6.16**

The electronegativity scale was developed by Nobel Prize winning
American chemist Linus Pauling. The largest electronegativity (3.98) is
assigned to fluorine, and all other electronegativity measurements are
made relative to that value.

</div>

Since metals have few valence electrons, they tend to increase their
stability by losing electrons to become cations. Consequently, the
electronegativities of metals are generally low. Nonmetals have more
valence electrons and increase their stability by gaining electrons to
become anions. The electronegativities of nonmetals are generally high.

Electronegativities generally increase from left to right across a
period. This is due to an increase in nuclear charge because of the
greater number of protons in the nucleus. Alkali metals have the lowest
electronegativities, while halogens have the highest. Because most noble
gases do not form compounds, they are generally not assigned
electronegativity values. Note that there is little variation among the
transition metals. Electronegativities generally decrease from top to
bottom within a group due to the larger atomic size.

## Metals and Nonmetals {#6.html#x-ck12-TWV0YWxzIGFuZCBOb25tZXRhbHM._2-bwp}

### Physical Properties {#6.html#x-ck12-UGh5c2ljYWwgUHJvcGVydGllcw.._2-ihd}

Elements can be classified in a number of different ways. Classifying by
period and/or group is useful because it is based on electron
configuration. Another way is to classify elements based on physical
properties. Three broad classes of elements that are categorized in this
way include metals, nonmetals, and metalloids.

A **metal** is an element that is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. Metals are also malleable, which means that they can be
hammered into very thin sheets without breaking, and ductile, which
means that they can be drawn into wires. When a fresh surface of any
metal is exposed, it will be very shiny, because it reflects light well.
This property is referred to as luster. All metals are solid at room
temperature except mercury (Hg), which is a liquid. The melting points
of different metals vary widely. Mercury has the lowest melting point of
all pure metals (−39°C), and tungsten (W) has the highest (3422°C). On
the periodic table in **Figure**
[above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjYtRWxlY3Ryb25lZ2F0aXZpdHk.) , the
metals are shaded blue and are located to the left of the bold
stair-step line. About 80 percent of the elements are metals (see
examples in **Figure** [below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMDYtTWV0YWxz)
).

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-NGUyN2FmNzQ4YTM5NWNlMzc4YTEyMDQyNzIwMGNmODI.-k7b"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Mercury: User:Bionerd/Wikimedia Commons; Gold: Eckhard Pecher; Copper: Scott Ehardt" -->
<!-- @@url="Mercury: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pouring_liquid_mercury_bionerd.jpg; Gold: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kanazawa_Gold_Factory.jpg; Copper: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stranded_lamp_wire.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Mercury: CC BY 3.0; Gold: CC BY 2.5; Copper: Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204536459.png)

**Figure 6.17**

The elements mercury, gold, and copper display properties that are
common of metals. Mercury ( *left* ) is the only metal that is a liquid
at room temperature. Even in its liquid form, it still has a high
luster. Gold ( *middle* ) is malleable and can be formed into very thin
sheets called gold leaf. Because copper ( *right* ) is ductile,
inexpensive, and a good conductor, it is used extensively in electrical
wiring.

</div>

**Properties of Metals**

-   shiny 'metallic' appearance
-   solids at room temperature (except mercury)
-   high melting points
-   high densities
-   large atomic radii
-   low ionization energies
-   low electronegativities
-   generally high deformation
-   malleable (can easily be hammered out without breaking)
-   ductile (can be draw out into thin wire)
-   thermal conductors (transfer heat well)
-   electrical conductors (transfer electricity well)

A **nonmetal** is an element that is generally a poor conductor of heat
and electricity. Many properties of nonmetals are the opposite of those
seen in metals. There is a wider variation in properties among the
nonmetals than among the metals, as seen in **Figure**
[below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMDctTm9ubWV0YWxz) . Nonmetals exist
in all three states of matter at room temperature. The majority are
gases, such as nitrogen and oxygen. Bromine is a liquid, and a few are
solids, such as carbon and sulfur. In the solid state, nonmetals are
brittle, meaning that they will shatter if struck with a hammer. The
solids are not lustrous, and their melting points are generally much
lower than those of metals. On the periodic table in the **Figure**
[above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjYtRWxlY3Ryb25lZ2F0aXZpdHk.) , the
nonmetals are shaded green and appear to the right of the stair-step
line.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ZDVjNzk0MjM1NjJhYmI5YTJhOGZkNDUxMGUwMzRhY2Y.-x4h"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Sulfur: Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons); Bromine: Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; Helium: Derek Jensen (User:Tysto/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="Sulfur: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur-sample.jpg; Bromine: http://images-of-elements.com/bromine.php; Helium: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Goodyear-blimp.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Sulfur: Public Domain; Bromine: CC BY 3.0; Helium: Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204677357.png)

**Figure 6.18**

Nonmetals have properties that are unlike those of metals. Sulfur (
*left* ) is brittle, and its distinctive yellow color lacks luster.
Bromine ( *center* ) is the only liquid nonmetal and must be carefully
handled due to its toxicity. Helium ( *right* ), a colorless and
unreactive gas, is lighter than air and thus is used in blimps.

</div>

**Properties of Nonmetals**

-   typically good oxidizing agents
-   form acidic oxides
-   have higher electronegativities
-   non-lustrous
-   non-conductors
-   non-ductile (few exceptions)

A **metalloid** is an element with properties that are intermediate
between those of metals and nonmetals. Silicon is a typical metalloid (
**Figure** [below](#6.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDYtMTQtU2lsaWNvbg..) ). It
has luster like a metal, but is brittle like a nonmetal. Silicon is used
extensively in computer chips and other electronics because its
electrical conductivity is in between that of a metal and a nonmetal.
Metalloids can also be called semimetals. On the periodic table in the
**Figure**
[above](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjYtRWxlY3Ryb25lZ2F0aXZpdHk.) , the
elements that are shaded orange are considered to be metalloids, and
they include most of the elements that border the stair-step line.
Notice that aluminum also borders the line, but it is considered to be a
metal because its properties most closely resemble those of metals.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-ZDQwNzE1NGQxYTg3NGQzNmEwZmFhNDM0MTUzYWFiOTU.-k7s"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Silicon.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235204929820.jpeg)

**Figure 6.19**

Elemental Silicon

</div>

**Properties of Metalloids**

-   electronegativities between those of metals and nonmetals
-   ionization energies between those of metals and nonmetals
-   possess some characteristics of metals and some of nonmetals
-   reactivity depends on properties of other components of the
    particular reaction
-   often make good semiconductors

### Periodic Trends in Metallic Character {#6.html#x-ck12-UGVyaW9kaWMgVHJlbmRzIGluIE1ldGFsbGljIENoYXJhY3Rlcg.._2-dkt}

Pure elements with a high metallic character, meaning those that have
chemical properties most similar to properties of metals, are generally
very reactive. Metals tend to lose electrons in chemical reactions, as
indicated by their low ionization energies. Within a compound, metal
atoms have a relatively low attraction to shared electrons, as indicated
by their low electronegativity values. By following the trend summary in
**Figure** [below](#6.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDYtMjctVHJlbmRz) , you can
see that the most reactive metals would reside in the lower left portion
of the periodic table. The most reactive metal that occurs naturally in
reasonable quantities is cesium, which is always found in nature as a
compound, never as a free element. It reacts explosively with water and
will ignite spontaneously in air. Francium is below cesium in the alkali
metal group, but it is so rare that many of its properties have never
even been observed.

Nonmetals tend to gain electrons in chemical reactions and have a high
attraction to electrons within a compound. The most reactive nonmetals
reside in the upper right portion of the periodic table. Since the noble
gases are an unusually unreactive group, the element fluorine is the
most reactive nonmetal. It is also not found in nature as a free
element. Fluorine gas reacts explosively with many other elements and
compounds and is considered to be one of the most dangerous known
substances.

<div id="6.html#x-ck12-OGJlM2JjZjljYTRmOThjZTFkYWFlOGM2MDhhOTNjZmE.-dnj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Mirek2/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic_trends.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_6_files/20151009235205089263.png)

**Figure 6.20**

Summary of periodic trends within periods and groups.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-i9h}

-   The chemical behavior of elements can largely be explained by
    electron configurations.
-   The elements on the far left of the periodic table (groups 1 and 2)
    are very reactive as pure metals, while the noble gases (group 18)
    are almost totally unreactive.
-   Ionization energy is the energy required to remove an electron from
    a specific atom. Ionization energy generally increases as you move
    left to right across the table or from bottom to top.
-   Electron affinity is the energy required for an electron to be added
    to a neutral atom in its gaseous form. Because most atoms release
    energy when an electron is added, most electron affinity values
    are negative. These values generally become more negative (more
    energy is released) as you move left to right across the table or
    from bottom to top.
-   Ionic radius helps to indicate the size of an ion as compared to its
    parent atom. Cations always have a smaller atomic radius than the
    parent atom; anions always have a larger atomic radius than the
    parent atom.
-   When an atom gains an electron, its radius increases. Conversely,
    when an atom loses an electron, its radius decreases. The radius of
    an anion is larger than the radius of a neutral isoelectronic atom
    because there are fewer protons available to attract the same number
    of electrons. The reverse is true for cations.
-   Electronegativity is a measure of the relative tendency of an atom
    to attract electrons to itself when chemically combined with
    another atom. In general, electronegativity increases as you move
    left to right across the table and from bottom to top.
-   Periodic trends in metallic and nonmetallic characteristics mirror
    those of the other properties that we have discussed; the most
    metallic elements are at the lower left of the table, and the most
    nonmetallic elements are at the upper right.

## Lesson Review Questions {#6.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-xji}

1.  Compare and contrast the characteristics of metals and nonmetals.
2.  Write the electron configurations for the following ions:
    1.  Li ^+^
    2.  Be ^2+^
    3.  N ^3-^
    4.  O ^2-^
    5.  F ^-^

3.  Which configuration corresponds to an atom with a larger radius: 1s
    ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^1^ or 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ ? Identify these elements.
4.  Which configuration corresponds to an atom with a larger radius: 1s
    ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ or 1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^ ? Identify
    these elements.
5.  Using only the periodic table, arrange each set of atoms in order of
    increasing atomic radius:
    1.  Rb, Cs, Li
    2.  B, Li, F
    3.  Cl, F, Ba
    4.  Rb, Be, K
    5.  Cl, Al, Ba

6.  Arrange each set of atoms and ions in order of increasing radius:
    1.  O, O ^-^ , O ^2-^
    2.  Li ^+^ , Li, Be ^2+^
    3.  Na ^+^ , Mg ^2+^ , Al ^3+^
    4.  F ^-^ , Br ^-^ , O ^2-^
    5.  Cs ^+^ , Ba ^2+^ , Al ^3+^

7.  Arrange each set of atoms in order of increasing electron affinity
    (least negative to most negative):
    1.  Li, K, F
    2.  F, O, N
    3.  S, Cl, Ca
    4.  I, Ba, Tl
    5.  Br, Al, I

8.  Pick the largest ionization energy for each set:
    1.  IE ~1~ (Li), IE ~2~ (Li), IE ~1~ (Be)
    2.  IE ~2~ (Cs), IE ~1~ (Rb), IE ~7~ (Na)
    3.  IE ~1~ (Y), IE ~1~ (Zr), IE ~3~ (Zr)

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#6.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-maf}

-   Barber, R. C., Karol, P. J., Nakahara, H., Vardaci, E., & Vogt, E.
    W. (2011). Discovery of the elements with atomic numbers greater
    than or equal to 113 (IUPAC Technical Report). Pure and Applied
    Chemistry, 83(7), 1485 - 1498.
-   Bonifácio, V. D. B. (2012). QR-Coded Audio Periodic Table of the
    Elements: A Mobile-Learning Tool. Journal of Chemical Education.
    doi: 10.1021/ed200541e
-   Hsu, D. D. (2012). Chemicool Dictionary, from
    [http://www.chemicool.com/dictionary.html](dictionary.html)
-   Gorin, G. (1996). Mendeleev and Moseley: The Principal Discoverers
    of the Periodic Law. Journal of Chemical Education, 73(6), 490. doi:
    10.1021/ed073p490
-   Jensen, W. B. (2005). The Origin of the 18-Electron Rule. Journal of
    Chemical Education, 82(1), 28. doi: 10.1021/ed082p28
-   “Law of octaves.” (2012) Encyclopædia Britannica: Encyclopædia
    Britannica Inc.
-   Levi, P. (1984). The Periodic Table. New York: Pantheon Books.
-   Trimble, R. F. (1981). Mendeleev's discovery of the periodic law.
    Journal of Chemical Education, 58(1), 28. doi: 10.1021/ed058p28

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686100] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#6.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-t1p}

1.  John Dalton.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dalton%27s\_Element\_List.jpg](File:Dalton%27s_Element_List.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  Dmitri Mendeleeev.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mendelejevs\_periodiska\_system\_1871.png](File:Mendelejevs_periodiska_system_1871.png) .
    Public Domain
3.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
4.  Christopher Auyeung and Joy Sheng. [CK-12
    Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
5.  Courtesy of the US Department of Energy.
    [http://www.etec.energy.gov/Operations/Sodium/Sodium\_Index.html](Sodium_Index.html) .
    Public Domain
6.  Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements. [Be:
    http://images-of-elements.com/beryllium.php; Mg:
    http://images-of-elements.com/magnesium.php; Ca:
    http://images-of-elements.com/calcium.php; Sr:
    http://images-of-elements.com/strontium.php; Ba:
    http://images-of-elements.com/barium.php](barium.php) . CC BY 3.0
7.  Courtesy of Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements. [Silver:
    http://images-of-elements.com/silver.php; Chromium:
    http://images-of-elements.com/chromium.php](chromium.php) . CC BY
    3.0
8.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coloured-transition-metal-solutions.jpg](File:Coloured-transition-metal-solutions.jpg) .
    Public Domain
9.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
10. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
11. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
12. User:JJnoDog/De.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:IonizationEnergyAtomicWeight.PNG](File:IonizationEnergyAtomicWeight.PNG) .
    Public Domain
13. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
14. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
15. Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
16. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
17. Mercury: User:Bionerd/Wikimedia Commons; Gold: Eckhard Pecher;
    Copper: Scott Ehardt. [Mercury:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pouring\_liquid\_mercury\_bionerd.jpg;
    Gold:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kanazawa\_Gold\_Factory.jpg;
    Copper:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stranded\_lamp\_wire.jpg](File:Stranded_lamp_wire.jpg) .
    Mercury: CC BY 3.0; Gold: CC BY 2.5; Copper: Public Domain
18. Sulfur: Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons); Bromine:
    Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; Helium: Derek Jensen
    (User:Tysto/Wikimedia Commons). [Sulfur:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur-sample.jpg; Bromine:
    http://images-of-elements.com/bromine.php; Helium:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Goodyear-blimp.jpg](File:Goodyear-blimp.jpg) .
    Sulfur: Public Domain; Bromine: CC BY 3.0; Helium: Public Domain
19. User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Silicon.jpg](File:Silicon.jpg) .
    CC BY 3.0
20. User:Mirek2/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Periodic\_trends.svg](File:Periodic_trends.svg) .
    Public Domain

<span id="7.html"></span>

# Chemical Nomenclature {#7.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgTm9tZW5jbGF0dXJl-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_7_files/20151009235210214841.jpeg)
</span>

The opening image shows crystals of the mineral cinnabar, which is the
most common mercury-containing ore. It is primarily composed of the
compound mercuric sulfide, HgS. Cinnabar has been mined since the Stone
Age for its uses as a pigment and as a source of pure mercury. Mercury
can be easily harvested from cinnabar by roasting cinnabar powder
(vermillion), which actually vaporizes the mercury metal. The hot
mercury vapor can then be recondensed to yield pure liquid mercury.

Cinnabar is one of thousands of minerals that occur naturally on earth.
Some minerals are common (like cinnabar) while others are rarer (like
ores of gold and silver). Another less common mercury-containing mineral
is montroydite, which is composed primarily of mercuric oxide (HgO). The
composition of mercuric oxide was first determined in 1774 by the
English chemist Joseph Priestley. Priestley showed that heating
montroydite powder produced mercury metal and a gas, which he called
phlogiston-free air. The gas was later determined to be oxygen. The
revised name, based on information gained from experiments, allowed
chemists to have a better understanding of chemical composition and
chemical reactions. Clear unambiguous naming makes communication much
easier and more reliable.

^Parent\\ Géry.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cinabre\_macl%C3%A9\_%28Chine%29\_.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686102] -->

# Ionic Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-SW9uaWMgQ29tcG91bmRz}

## Lesson Objectives {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-i0e}

-   Define and give examples of chemical formulas for ionic compounds.
-   Be able to name and write the formulas for both monatomic and
    polyatomic ions.
-   Explain and use the Stock system for naming ionic compounds,
    when necessary.
-   Memorize the list of polyatomic ions, including both the formulas
    and the charges.
-   When given the chemical formula for an ionic compound, be able to
    write its name.
-   When given the name of an ionic compound, be able to write its
    chemical formula.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-irm}

-   **empirical formula** : The lowest whole-number ratio between
    two ions.
-   **binary ionic compound** : A compound made up of a cation and
    an anion.
-   **ternary ionic compound** : An ionic compound that is composed of
    more than two elements.
-   **monatomic ion** : Form when a single atom gains or
    loses electrons.
-   **polyatomic ion** : An ion composed of more than one atom.
-   **oxoanion** : Anions in which one or more oxygen atoms are all
    bonded to a central atom of some other element.

## Introduction {#7.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-ezq}

As we saw in the previous chapter, ions are formed when atoms gain or
lose electrons. If an atom loses one or more electrons, the resulting
ion has a positive charge (more protons are present than electrons). If
the atom gains one or more electrons, the resulting ion has a negative
charge (more electrons are present than protons). Positive ions are
called cations, and negative ions are called anions. Because opposite
charges attract one another, cations and anions are held together by
strong electromagnetic forces. An ionic compound consists of a large
three-dimensional array of alternating cations and anions. For example,
sodium chloride (NaCl) is composed of Na ^+^ and Cl ^-^ ions arranged
into a structure like the one shown in **Figure**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDctMDItU2FsdA..) .

<div id="7.html#x-ck12-NDdiNDg1MjFhYmRkMzQ5NDQ2OTEzY2NlM2FjYjRiMzQ.-bsv"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-chloride-3D-ionic.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_7_files/20151009235210326911.png)

**Figure 7.1**

A crystal of table salt, sodium chloride, is a large array of
alternating positive and negative ions. The purple spheres represent the
Na ^+^ ions, while the green spheres represent the Cl ^-^ ions.

</div>

The most straightforward way to describe this structure with a chemical
formula is to give the lowest whole-number ratio between the two ions,
which is known as an **empirical formula** . In the case of NaCl, there
are equal numbers of sodium ions and chloride ions in the salt crystal.
In contrast, a crystal of magnesium chloride has twice as many chloride
ions as magnesium ions, so it has a formula of MgCl ~2~ .

## Naming Ionic Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-TmFtaW5nIElvbmljIENvbXBvdW5kcw..-s7x}

Ionic compounds are composed of one type of cation and one type of
anion. The name of an ionic compound can be formed by writing the name
of the cation followed by the name of the anion. For example, NaCl is
composed of sodium ions (Na ^+^ ) and chloride ions (Cl ^-^ ), so its
name is sodium chloride. Ionic compounds like NaCl that are composed of
only two elements are referred to as **binary ionic compounds** .
Similarly, KOH is composed of potassium ions (K ^+^ ) and hydroxide ions
(OH ^-^ ), so its name is potassium hydroxide. Ionic compounds like KOH
that are composed of more than two elements are referred to as **ternary
ionic compounds** . To learn how to name various ionic compounds, we
simply need to learn the names of individual ions.

## Monatomic Ions {#7.html#x-ck12-TW9uYXRvbWljIElvbnM.-6ep}

**Monatomic ions** form when a single atom gains or loses electrons. For
the main group elements, cations are generally formed by removing all of
the valence electrons from the atom. Since the numbers of valence
electrons for the representative elements are constant within a
particular group, all we need is the group number of a given element to
know its charge when it becomes a cation. Group 1 elements form ions
with a 1+ charge, Group 2 metal ions have a 2+ charge, and the ions of
Group 13 elements tend to have a 3+ charge. Heavier p-block metals such
as tin and lead are special cases and will be discussed with the
transition metal ions. The name of a monatomic cation is the same as the
name of the neutral element. For example, the sodium atom (Na) loses a
single electron to form the sodium ion (Na ^+^ ), while Al ^3+^ is an
aluminum ion.

Anions form when an atom gains electrons. Nonmetallic atoms typically
gain enough electrons to obtain the same electron configuration as the
nearest noble gas. All the elements in Group 17 have seven valence
electrons, which are arranged into an outer configuration of *n* s ^2^
*n* p ^5^ . To achieve a noble gas configuration ( *n* s ^2^ *n* p ^6^
), each of these elements needs to gain just one electron, resulting in
an anion with a 1− charge. Similarly, Group 16 elements can obtain an
*n* s ^2^ *n* p ^6^ valence configuration by forming ions with a 2−
charge, and the Group 15 nonmetals will form ions with a 3− charge.
Naming anions is slightly different than naming cations. The end of the
element’s name is dropped and replaced with the – *ide* suffix. For
example, when the chlorine atom (Cl) gains one electron, it becomes the
chloride ion (Cl ^-^ ). This structure has the same electron
configuration as the noble gas argon. Similarly, sulfur can gain two
electrons to become the sulfide ion (S ^2-^ ), which also has a noble
gas configuration.

Most main group elements, particularly those in groups 1, 2, 16, and 17,
gain or lose enough electrons to form ions that have the same electron
configuration as that of the nearest noble gas. **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy4x) shows the names and charges
for common monatomic ions of the representative elements:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1+           2+           3+           3-           2-           1-
  ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------
  lithium, Li  beryllium,   aluminum, Al nitride, N   oxide, O     fluoride, F
  ^+^          Be ^2+^      ^3+^         ^3-^         ^2-^         ^-^

  sodium, Na   magnesium,   gallium, Ga  phosphide, P sulfide, S   chloride, Cl
  ^+^          Mg ^2+^      ^3+^         ^3-^         ^2-^         ^-^

  potassium, K calcium, Ca               arsenide, As selenide, Se bromide, Br
  ^+^          ^2+^                      ^3-^         ^2-^         ^-^

  rubidium, Rb strontium,                             telluride,   iodide, I
  ^+^          Sr ^2+^                                Te ^2-^      ^-^

  cesium, Cs   barium, Ba                                          
  ^+^          ^2+^                                                
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  :  Common Monatomic Ions

### Transition Metal Ions {#7.html#x-ck12-VHJhbnNpdGlvbiBNZXRhbCBJb25z-u56}

Most transition metals differ from the metals of Groups 1, 2, and 13 in
that they are capable of forming more than one type of stable cation.
For example, iron sometimes loses two electrons to form the Fe ^2+^ ion,
but it is also common for iron to lose three electrons to form the Fe
^3+^ ion. Although they are members of the p block and not the d block,
tin and lead also form more than one type of ion. Because the charges of
these ions cannot simply determined by looking at the periodic table,
they must have names that also indicate their charge. The Stock system,
proposed by Alfred Stock (1876-1946), denotes the charge of these ions
by using a Roman numeral in parentheses after the name of the ion. For
example, the previously mentioned iron ions are named the iron (II) ion
and the iron (III) ion. When said out loud, “iron (II) ion” should be
read, “iron two ion.” **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy4y) lists the names and
formulas of some of the more common transition metal ions:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1+                 2+                 3+                 4+
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  copper (I), Cu ^+^ cadmium, Cd ^2+^   chromium (III), Cr lead (IV), Pb ^4+^
                                        ^3+^               

  gold (I), Au ^+^   chromium (II), Cr  cobalt (III), Co   tin (IV), Sn ^4+^
                     ^2+^               ^3+^               

  silver, Ag ^+^     cobalt (II), Co    gold (III), Au     
                     ^2+^               ^3+^               

                     copper (II), Cu    iron (III), Fe     
                     ^2+^               ^3+^               

                     iron (II), Fe ^2+^                    

                     lead (II), Pb ^2+^                    

                     manganese (II), Mn                    
                     ^2+^                                  

                     mercury (II), Hg                      
                     ^2+^                                  

                     nickel (II), Ni                       
                     ^2+^                                  

                     platinum (II), Pt                     
                     ^2+^                                  

                     tin (II), Sn ^2+^                     

                     zinc, Zn ^2+^                         
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

  :  Common Transition Metal Ions

Notice in **Table** [above](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy4y) that
there are three cations whose names do not include a Roman numeral.
Silver, cadmium, and zinc only form one common type of ion, so the
charges on ions of these elements are considered to be implied by the
name (1+ for silver, and 2+ for zinc and cadmium). By convention, the
Stock system is not used for these elements, and their cations are named
in the same way as those of the representative elements.

There is also an older system for naming some of these cations that is
still occasionally used. The Latin root of the metal name is written
with one of two suffixes: (1) *–ic* for the ion with a higher charge,
and (2) *–ous* for the ion with a lower charge. For example, the Latin
name for iron is ferrum, so the Fe ^3+^ ion is called the ferric ion,
and the Fe ^2+^ ion is called the ferrous ion. The primary disadvantage
of this system is that the suffixes do not tell you exactly what the
charge is for a given ion. For copper, the two most common charges are
1+ and 2+, so Cu ^2+^ is called the cupric ion and Cu ^+^ is the cuprous
ion. The Stock system is a much more informative system and will be used
as the primary method for naming transition metal compounds throughout
this book.

**Example 7.1**

What are the names of the following compounds?

1.  CuCl (composed of Cu ^+^ and Cl ^-^ )
2.  HgO (composed of Hg ^2+^ and O ^2-^ )
3.  Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (composed of Fe ^3+^ and O ^2-^ )
4.  MnO ~2~ (composed of Mn ^4+^ and O ^2-^ )

*Answers:*

1.  copper (I) chloride
2.  mercury (II) oxide
3.  iron (III) oxide
4.  manganese (IV) oxide

In the above example, we gave you the charges of the cations, but what
if all you had was the formula? Ionic compounds must be electrically
neutral, so if the charge on the anion is known, the charge of the
cation can be determined from the ratio given by the formula. For
example, we know that chlorine forms an ion with a charge of -1. If we
see the formula CuCl, we know that copper must have a charge of +1,
because in order for the charges to cancel, we would need to combine
these ions in a 1:1 ratio. Similarly, the formula CuCl ~2~ , we would
know that copper has a charge of +2, because two Cl ^-^ ions are
required to balance out the charge of each Cu ^2+^ ion. In general, the
charge on the anion can be determined from inspection, and the charge on
the cation can be indirectly determined from the ratio by which the
cation and anion combined.

## Polyatomic Ions {#7.html#x-ck12-UG9seWF0b21pYyBJb25z-8om}

A **polyatomic ion** is an ion composed of more than one atom. For
example, the ammonium ion consists of one nitrogen atom and four
hydrogen atoms. Together, they comprise a single ion with a 1+ charge
and a formula of NH ~4~ ^+^ . The carbonate ion consists of one carbon
atom and three oxygen atoms, and it carries an overall charge of 2−. The
formula of the carbonate ion is CO ~3~ ^2-^ . The atoms of a polyatomic
ion are tightly bonded together, so the entire ion behaves as a single
unit. **Figure**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDctMDQtUG9seWF0b21pYw..) shows several
models, and **Table** [below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy4z) lists
many of the most common polyatomic ions.

<div id="7.html#x-ck12-YmMwYTMzNjQ1NjhjY2MyZGQxMmE1MDY4OWVlMTY4YjQ.-cgh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="(A) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonium-3D-balls.png; (B) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydroxide-3D-vdW.png; (C) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carbonate-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_7_files/20151009235210530028.png)

**Figure 7.2**

\(A) The ammonium ion (NH ~4~ ^+^ ) is a nitrogen atom (blue) bonded to
four hydrogen atoms (white). (B) The hydroxide ion (OH ^-^ ) is an
oxygen atom (red) bonded to a hydrogen atom. (C) The carbonate ion (CO
~3~ ^2-^ ) is a carbon atom (black) bonded to three oxygen atoms.

</div>

<div id="7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy4z">

[![](images/table.png)](table_7-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

### Oxoanions {#7.html#x-ck12-T3hvYW5pb25z-njp}

Note that the vast majority of polyatomic ions are anions, many of which
end in *–ate* or *–ite* . In some cases, such as nitrate (NO ~3~ ^-^ )
and nitrite (NO ~2~ ^-^ ), there are multiple anions that consist of the
same two elements. This is particularly common for **oxoanions** , which
are anions in which one or more oxygen atoms are all bonded to a central
atom of some other element. A given element may form several oxoanions
that all have the same charge but differ in the number of oxygen atoms
present. When there are two common oxoanions for a particular element,
the one with the greater number of oxygen atoms gets an *–ate* suffix,
while the one with the lower number of oxygen atoms gets an *–ite*
suffix. Some elements form more than two common oxoanions, such as
chlorine:

-   ClO ^-^ , hypochlorite
-   ClO ~2~ ^-^ , chlorite
-   ClO ~3~ ^-^ , chlorate
-   ClO ~4~ ^-^ , perchlorate

For larger families of oxoanions, the ion with one more oxygen atom than
the *–ate* anion is given a *per-* prefix, and the ion with one fewer
oxygen atom than the *–ite* anion is given a *hypo-* prefix. Organizing
oxoanions in the following format (in **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy44) ) may help with
memorization:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Central Atom Root         1 more       “normal”     1 less       2 less
                            oxygen                    oxygen       oxygens
  ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------
  Chlorine     chlor-       ClO ~4~ ^-^  ClO ~3~ ^-^  ClO ~2~ ^-^  ClO ^-^
                            *per* chlor  chlor *ate*  chlor *ite*  *hypo* chlor
                            *ate*                                  *ite*

  Bromine      brom-        BrO ~4~ ^-^  BrO ~3~ ^-^  BrO ~2~ ^-^  BrO ^-^

  Iodine       iod-         IO ~4~ ^-^   IO ~3~ ^-^                

  Sulfur       sulf-        SO ~5~ ^2-^  SO ~4~ ^2-^  SO ~3~ ^2-^  SO ~2~ ^2-^

  Nitrogen     nitr-                     NO ~3~ ^-^   NO ~2~ ^-^   

  Phosphorus   phosph-                   PO ~4~ ^3-^  PO ~3~ ^3-^  PO ~2~ ^3-^

  Carbon       carbon-                   CO ~3~ ^2-^               
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  :  Common Oxoanions

## Writing Formulas from Names {#7.html#x-ck12-V3JpdGluZyBGb3JtdWxhcyBmcm9tIE5hbWVz-3vq}

### Binary Ionic Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-QmluYXJ5IElvbmljIENvbXBvdW5kcw..-ztn}

If you know the name of a binary ionic compound, you can write its
formula. Start by writing the metal ion and its charge, followed by the
nonmetal ion with its charge. The overall compound must be electrically
neutral, so the ions must combine in a ratio that allows the positive
and negative charges to cancel each other out. Consider the compound
aluminum nitride. The charges on each of these ions can be determined by
looking at the groups in which aluminum and nitrogen are found. The ions
are:

<dl id="x-ck12-9zc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-5aj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ikr">
<dd>
![\\text{Al}\^{3+} \\ \\ \\ \\
\\text{N}\^{3-}](ck12_math_images_dir/0c278e34c220db58866922f1433fdb55.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Since the ions have charges that are equal in magnitude, 1:1 is the
lowest ratio of ions that will produce a neutral compound. As a result,
the formula of aluminum nitride is AlN. Another compound, lithium oxide,
contains the following ions:

<dl id="x-ck12-paz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bjy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-4pi">
<dd>
![\\text{Li}\^+ \\ \\ \\ \\
\\text{O}\^{2-}](ck12_math_images_dir/38d6e15b891ceb99b66cccce7414bd98.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this case, two lithium ions are required to balance out the charge of
each oxide ion. The formula of lithium oxide is Li ~2~ O.

For compounds in which the ratio of ions is not as obvious, an
alternative way to determine the correct formula is to use the
crisscross method. In this method, the numerical value of each charge
crosses over to become the subscript of the opposite ion. The signs of
the charges are dropped. The crisscross method is demonstrated below for
aluminum oxide.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_7_files/20151009235210690274.png) </span>

The red arrows indicate that the 3 from the 3+ charge will cross over to
become the subscript for O, while the 2 from the 2− charge will cross
over to become the subscript for Al. The formula for aluminum oxide is
Al ~2~ O ~3~ .

For aluminum oxide, the crisscross method directly produces the correct
formula, but in some cases, another step is required. Because ionic
compounds are always described by their empirical formulas, they must be
written as the lowest whole-number ratio of the ions. In the case of
aluminum nitride, the crisscross method would yield a formula of Al ~3~
N ~3~ , which is not correct. A second step must be performed in which
the subscripts are reduced but the ratio is kept the same. Al ~3~ N ~3~
can be reduced to AlN, because both formulas describe a 1:1 ratio of
aluminum ions to nitride ions. Following the crisscross method to write
the formula for lead(IV) oxide would involve the following steps:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_7_files/20151009235210813561.png) </span>

The crisscross method first yields Pb ~2~ O ~4~ for the formula, but
that must be reduced to PbO ~2~ , which is the correct formula.

### Ternary Ionic Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-VGVybmFyeSBJb25pYyBDb21wb3VuZHM.-hja}

Writing a formula for a ternary ionic compound involves the same steps
as for a binary ionic compound. Write the symbol and charge of the
cation followed by the symbol and charge of the anion. Use the
crisscross method to ensure that the final formula is neutral. For
example, calcium nitrate is composed of calcium cations and nitrate
anions.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_7_files/20151009235210942656.png) </span>

The charge is balanced by the presence of two nitrate ions and one
calcium ion. Parentheses are used around the nitrate ion because more
than one of the polyatomic ion is needed. If only one polyatomic ion is
present in a formula, parentheses are not used. For example, the formula
for calcium carbonate is CaCO ~3~ . The carbonate ion carries a 2−
charge, so it exactly balances the 2+ charge of the calcium ion.

## Lesson Summary {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-oat}

-   Ionic compounds are composed of cations and anions, which combine in
    a ratio that makes the overall compound electrically neutral.
-   Ionic compounds are named by writing the name of the cation followed
    by the name of the anion.
-   Monatomic cations have the same name as their parent element,
    whereas monatomic anions end in - *ide* .
-   For main group elements, the charges of monatomic cations and anions
    can be determined by looking at which group the element belongs to
    on the periodic table.
-   Cations that can possess more than one possible charge are named by
    the Stock system, in which the charge is indicated in the name with
    Roman numerals.
-   Polyatomic ions consist of more than one atom and act as a
    single unit. Their names and charges must be memorized.

## Lesson Review Questions {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-cs1}

1.  What is the purpose of an empirical formula?
2.  Define binary and ternary ionic compounds.
3.  What is the difference between a monatomic and a polyatomic ion?
4.  For each of the following ionic compounds, what ions are present and
    in what ratio?
    1.  MgBr ~2~
    2.  Li ~2~ CO ~3~
    3.  Fe ~2~ (SO ~4~ ) ~3~

5.  Predict the compound that forms when gallium combines with oxygen.
    What would the name of this compound be?
6.  Give the formula for each of the following ionic compounds:
    1.  ammonium nitrate
    2.  cobalt (II) sulfate
    3.  nickel (II) cyanide
    4.  vanadium (III) oxide
    5.  barium oxide
    6.  calcium hypochlorite

7.  Name the following ionic compounds:
    1.  MgBr ~2~
    2.  Li ~2~ CO ~3~
    3.  KHSO ~3~
    4.  KMnO ~4~
    5.  (NH ~4~ ) ~2~ S
    6.  CuCl
    7.  CuCl ~2~

8.  Write the correct formulas for the following ionic compounds:
    1.  barium chloride
    2.  chromium(III) oxide
    3.  potassium sulfate
    4.  zinc phosphate

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#7.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-k8l}

-   Martín-Gil, J., F. J. Martín-Gil, G. Delibes-de-Castro, P.
    Zapatero-Magdaleno, and F. J. Sarabia-Herrero. 1995. The first known
    use of vermillion. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
    51 (8):759-761.
-   “Chemical Nomenclature. Chem Team 2012.” Available from
    [http://www.chemteam.info/Nomenclature/Nomenclature.html](Nomenclature.html) .

## Points to Consider {#7.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-pr5}

-   Ionic compounds result from the transfer of electrons from metal
    atoms to nonmetal atoms, but not all compounds are ionic. A great
    many molecules are formed by the “sharing” of electrons rather than
    the complete exchange of electrons.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686102] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686103] -->

# Molecular Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-TW9sZWN1bGFyIENvbXBvdW5kcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-z7i}

-   Define a molecule and give examples of molecules.
-   Be able to name a molecular compound when given its formula.
-   Be able to write the formula for a molecular compound when given
    its name.
-   Know the common names for some simple molecular compounds, such as
    methane (CH ~4~ ), ammonia (NH ~3~ ), phosphine (PH ~3~ ), water (H
    ~2~ O), and hydrogen sulfide (H ~2~ S).

## Lesson Vocabulary {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-eiq}

-   **covalent bond** : Two or more atoms bonded together by
    sharing electrons.
-   **molecule** : A group of atoms are joined together by
    covalent bonds.
-   **molecular formula** : Designates how many of each atom are in a
    single molecule of that substance.
-   **binary molecular compound** : A molecular compound that is
    composed of two elements.

## Check Your Understanding {#7.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-atn}

-   Give an example of a cation and an anion.
-   Give an example of an ionic compound.
-   Name the following compounds: MgO, CuO.

## Introduction {#7.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-bad}

So far we have looked at ionic compounds, in which atoms of various
elements gain or lose electrons to produce ions. The resulting ions are
held together by strong attractions between oppositely charged
particles. However, this only works for bonds between atoms in which one
partner (the metal) has a tendency to lose electrons, and the other (the
nonmetal) has a tendency to gain them. Then how might two nonmetals,
such as nitrogen and oxygen, form chemical bonds? Neither is likely to
lose electrons and become a cation, but both require more electrons to
reach a noble gas configuration. Instead of a complete transfer of
electrons, these atoms can bond by sharing electrons, producing what is
called a **covalent bond** . When a group of atoms are joined together
by covalent bonds, the resulting structure is called a **molecule** .
Molecules are generally much smaller than the extended three-dimensional
networks of ions that are seen in ionic compounds. We will look much
more at covalent bonding and molecules in future chapters, but for now,
we will focus on the ways in which molecules are named.

## Naming Binary Molecular Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-TmFtaW5nIEJpbmFyeSBNb2xlY3VsYXIgQ29tcG91bmRz_1-vr6}

A **binary molecular compound** is a molecular compound that is composed
of two elements. In general, the elements that combine to form binary
molecular compounds are both nonmetals. This contrasts with ionic
compounds, which usually involve bonds between metal ions and nonmetal
ions. Because ionic charges cannot be used to name these compounds or to
write their formulas, a different naming system must be used for
molecular compounds. Another difference between ionic and molecular
compounds is that two nonmetal atoms will frequently combine with one
another in a variety of ratios. For example, nitrogen and oxygen combine
to make several binary compounds, including NO, NO ~2~ , and N ~2~ O.
Obviously they can’t all be called nitrogen oxide! How would someone
know which one you were talking about? Each of the three compounds has
very different properties and reactivity. A system to distinguish
between compounds such as these is necessary.

Prefixes are used in the names of binary molecular compounds to identify
the number of atoms of each element. **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy40) shows the prefixes for one
to ten atoms:

  Number of Atoms   Prefix
  ----------------- --------
  1                 mono-
  2                 di-
  3                 tri-
  4                 tetra-
  5                 penta-
  6                 hexa-
  7                 hepta-
  8                 octa-
  9                 nona-
  10                deca-

  :  Numerical Prefixes

The rules for using the prefix system of nomenclature of binary
molecular compounds can be summarized as follows:

1.  Generally, the less electronegative element is written first in the
    formula, though there are a few exceptions. Carbon is almost always
    first in a molecular formula, and hydrogen is usually written after
    nitrogen in a formula such as NH ~3~ . The order in which common
    nonmetals are written in binary compound formulas is the same as
    their order in the following series: C, P, N, H, S, I, Br, Cl, O, F.
2.  The first element in the formula is written first in the name of the
    compound, along with the appropriate prefix. No prefix is used if
    there is only one atom of the first element.
3.  The second element is named after the first, but the ending of the
    element’s name is changed to - *ide* . The appropriate prefix is
    always used for the second element, even if there is only one atom
    of that element. Even though the - *ide* suffix is also used to name
    anions, it is important to remember that molecules are held together
    by covalent bonds and do not contain cations and anions.
4.  The *a* or *o* at the end of a prefix is usually dropped from the
    name when the name of the element begins with a vowel. As an
    example, four oxygen atoms is tetroxide instead of tetrooxide.

Some examples of molecular compounds are listed in **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6RXg0) .

  Formula        Name
  -------------- ----------------------
  NO             nitrogen monoxide
  N ~2~ O        dinitrogen monoxide
  S ~2~ Cl ~2~   disulfur dichloride
  Cl ~2~ O ~7~   dichlorine heptoxide

  :  Examples of Molecular Compounds

Notice that the mono- prefix is not used with the nitrogen in the first
compound, but is used with the oxygen in both of the first two examples.
Also, the *o* of mono- and the *a* of hepta- are dropped from the name
when paired with oxide.

The example S ~2~ Cl ~2~ emphasizes another difference between ionic and
molecular substances. Because ionic substances exist as extended
networks, we simply give the lowest whole-number ratio of cations to
anions, which is the empirical formula. A molecular formula is not
simply a ratio. Rather, the **molecular formula** designates how many of
each atom are in a single molecule of that substance. S ~2~ Cl ~2~
cannot be reduced to SCl, because each molecule of disulfur dichloride
contains two sulfur atoms and two chlorine atoms.

**Example 7.2**

Name the following binary compounds.

1.  BF ~3~
2.  NO
3.  N ~2~ O ~5~
4.  PCl ~5~
5.  P ~4~ O ~6~

*Answer:*

1.  boron trifluoride
2.  nitrogen monoxide
3.  dinitrogen pentoxide
4.  phosphorous pentachloride
5.  tetraphosphorus hexoxide

### Writing Formulas for Binary Molecular Compounds {#7.html#x-ck12-V3JpdGluZyBGb3JtdWxhcyBmb3IgQmluYXJ5IE1vbGVjdWxhciBDb21wb3VuZHM._1-hqb}

When you know the name of a molecular compound, the prefixes directly
tell you which subscript to place with that element in the formula. If
there is no prefix, only one atom of that element is present and no
subscript is used. For example, if given the name diboron hexahydride,
you would realize that the molecule must contain two atoms of boron and
six atoms of hydrogen. Its formula is B ~2~ H ~6~ . Notice that
metalloids like boron generally form molecular compounds instead of
ionic compounds.

## Other Ways of Naming Molecules {#7.html#x-ck12-T3RoZXIgV2F5cyBvZiBOYW1pbmcgTW9sZWN1bGVz_1-nwj}

### Common Names {#7.html#x-ck12-Q29tbW9uIE5hbWVz_1-p13}

Some compounds (generally very common ones) are better known by names
that are different than the "official" names, which are designated by
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). A few
examples can be found in the following **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy42) .

  Formula       Common name                    IUPAC Name
  ------------- ------------------------------ -------------------------
  NO            nitric oxide                   nitrogen monoxide
  N ~2~ O       nitrous oxide (laughing gas)   dinitrogen monoxide
  N ~2~ H ~4~   hydrazine                      dinitrogen tetrahydride
  H ~2~ O       water                          dinitrogen monoxide
  NH ~3~        ammonia                        nitrogen trihydride
  PH ~3~        phosphine                      phosphorus trihydride
  H ~2~ S       hydrogen sulfide               dihydrogen monosulfide
  H ~2~ O ~2~   hydrogen peroxide              dihydrogen dioxide

  :  Common Names of Covalent Compounds

### Nomenclature for Organic Molecules {#7.html#x-ck12-Tm9tZW5jbGF0dXJlIGZvciBPcmdhbmljIE1vbGVjdWxlcw.._1-eny}

Carbon has a unique ability to form an extremely large variety of
molecules with just a few other common elements. In fact, most of the
molecules that make up living beings are composed of just carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen (with a little sulfur and phosphorus as
well). Knowing only the molecular formula for an organic molecule is not
enough to identify it; we also need to indicate how the atoms are
arranged within the molecule. For example, dimethyl ether and ethanol
are two molecules with very different properties that both have the
molecular formula C ~2~ H ~6~ O. One is an extremely flammable gas, and
the other is the intoxicating liquid found in alcoholic beverages. As a
result, most carbon-based molecules have a separate, more complex system
of naming that we will cover in another chapter. However, the formulas
for a few common organic compounds can be found in the **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy43) .

  Formula                Name
  ---------------------- -------------------------------
  CH ~4~                 methane
  CH ~3~ OH              methanol
  C ~2~ H ~6~            ethane
  C ~2~ H ~5~ OH         ethanol
  C ~3~ H ~7~ OH         isopropanol (rubbing alcohol)
  C ~6~ H ~12~ O ~6~     glucose
  C ~12~ H ~22~ O ~11~   sucrose

  :  Names of Common Organic Compounds

## Lesson Summary {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-agb}

-   Molecular compounds are formed when atoms are held together by
    covalent bonds, which involve sharing electrons rather than
    transferring them.
-   The formula of a binary molecular compound shows how many of each
    atom are present in the molecule. The less electronegative element
    is generally written first.
-   Prefixes are used in the names of molecular compounds to designate
    how many of each atom are in the molecule.

## Lesson Review Questions {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-5u0}

1.  How is a covalent bond characterized?
2.  What differs between ionic compounds and molecules?
3.  What are binary molecular compounds?
4.  What differs between a molecular formula and an empirical formula?
5.  Give the formula for each of the following binary covalent
    compounds:
    1.  carbon dioxide
    2.  phosphorus triiodide
    3.  sulfur dichloride
    4.  boron trifluoride
    5.  dioxygen difluoride
    6.  xenon trioxide

6.  Name the following binary covalent compounds:
    1.  N ~2~ F ~4~
    2.  HBr
    3.  SF ~4~
    4.  BCl ~3~
    5.  P ~2~ O ~5~
    6.  ClF ~3~

7.  Is "nitrogen oxide" an appropriate name for the compound NO? Why or
    why not?
8.  Is "calcium oxide" an appropriate name the compound CaO? Why or why
    not?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#7.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-cxw}

-   Winter, M. (1993-2011). WebElements: the periodic table on the WWW,
    from [http://www.webelements.com/]()

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686103] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686104] -->

# Acids and Bases {#7.html#x-ck12-QWNpZHMgYW5kIEJhc2Vz}

## Lesson Objectives {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-qup}

-   Define and give examples for the following terms: acid, base, binary
    acid, oxoacid.
-   Determine the name of an inorganic acid or base when given
    the formula.
-   Determine the formula of an inorganic acid or base when given
    its name.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-lyw}

-   **acid** : Any compound that produces hydrogen ions (H+) when
    dissolved in water.
-   **binary acid** : Acids in which one or more acidic hydrogen atoms
    are bound directly to a single atom.
-   **oxoacid** : A strong acid produced by combining oxoanions with one
    or more hydrogen ions.
-   **base** : A compound that produces the hydroxide (OH-) ion when
    dissolved in water.

## Check Your Understanding {#7.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-3o5}

1.  Name the following compounds:
    1.  NaNO ~3~
    2.  BF ~3~
    3.  FeSO ~3~

2.  Are the following compounds molecular or ionic?
    1.  H ~2~ O
    2.  CH ~4~
    3.  BaSO ~4~

## Introduction {#7.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-mhx}

In this chapter, we first looked at the naming conventions for ionic
compounds, which exist as extended networks of cations and anions. For
most of the compounds that we considered, the cation was a monatomic
metal (e.g., Na ^+^ , Mg ^2+^ , Fe ^3+^ ), and the anion was a monatomic
nonmetal (e.g., Cl ^-^ , O ^2-^ , N ^3-^ ) or a polyatomic ion, which
often contains multiple oxygen atoms (e.g., SO ~4~ ^2-^ ). We then
looked at molecular compounds, in which atoms are held together into
individual molecules by covalent bonds. Now we are going to consider
acids and bases, which share characteristics with both ionic and
molecular compounds.

## Acids {#7.html#x-ck12-QWNpZHM._2-4qb}

There are multiple ways to define what an acid is, but for the purposes
of this book, we will define an **acid** as any compound that produces
hydrogen ions (H ^+^ ) when dissolved in water. Based on this
definition, all acids contain at least one hydrogen atom, but not all
hydrogen-containing compounds are acids. When isolated as a pure
material, most acids exist as molecular substances. However, when
dissolved in water, one or more of the hydrogen atoms acts as an H ^+^
ion that transfers to water, leaving behind the remainder of the
molecule as an anion. This reaction with water can be represented by the
following generic equation, where HA represents an acid:

![\\mathrm{HA\_{(aq)}+H\_2O\_{(l)} \\rightarrow
A\^-\_{(aq)}+H\_3O\^+\_{(aq)}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3555dd4cd94c6d8d61afc42ad2bd5346.png)

As you can see, the acid reacts with a molecule of water to produce a
hydronium ion (H ~3~ O ^+^ ) and the A ^-^ anion. (Note: The H ^+^ ion
is sometimes referred to as a proton. This makes sense when you consider
that the most common form of the hydrogen atom consists of one proton
and one electron. When the single electron is removed to make a cation,
only a proton is left behind. As a result, the above reaction is
sometimes referred to as a proton transfer.) A specific example of this
process can be seen in the following animation:

[http://group.chem.iastate.edu/Greenbowe/sections/projectfolder/animations/HCl(aq).html](HCl(aq).html)

In this animation, hydrochloric acid (HCl) reacts with water to produce
the hydronium ion and the chloride ion. Even though HCl exists as a
molecular gas in the absence of water, it produces ions when water is
present. Acids have some unique properties and reactivity patterns that
we will discuss in future chapters. For now, we will focus on the ways
in which they are named.

### Binary Acids {#7.html#x-ck12-QmluYXJ5IEFjaWRz_2-tgj}

**Binary acids** are acids in which one or more acidic hydrogen atoms
are bound directly to a single atom. As a result, the anion left behind
when a binary acid is dissolved in water is a monatomic anion. Examples
include hydrogen chloride (HCl ~(g)~ and hydrogen sulfide (H ~2~ S ~(g)~
). Both of these substances are molecular gases in their pure form, but
change their properties and their names when dissolved in water. To name
a binary acid, start with the name of the anion left behind after the
acidic hydrogens have been removed. Then, add the prefix *hydro* - and
replace the suffix - *ide* with - *ic acid* . For example, HCl produces
Cl ^-^ ions when dissolved in water, so it would therefore be named
hydrochloric acid. Some other common binary acids are shown in the
following **Table** [below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy44) .

  Formula          Name                 Anion    Name
  ---------------- -------------------- -------- ----------
  HF ~(aq)~        hydrofluoric acid    F ^-^    fluoride
  HCl ~(aq)~       hydrochloric acid    Cl ^-^   chloride
  HBr ~(aq)~       hydrobromic acid     Br ^-^   bromide
  HI ~(aq)~        hydriodic acid       I ^-^    iodide
  H ~2~ S ~(aq)~   hydrosulfuric acid   S ^2-^   sulfide

  :  Common Binary Acids

Most of the binary acids listed here are monoprotic, because they have
only one acidic hydrogen. Hydrosulfuric acid, on the other hand is
diprotic. Its hydrogen ions are transferred to two water molecules in
two subsequent reactions.

### Oxoacids {#7.html#x-ck12-T3hvYWNpZHM._2-lpi}

So far we have looked at acids that leave behind monatomic anions.
However, many strong acids leave behind polyatomic anions as well. In
particular, many of the oxoanions we looked at earlier can combine with
one or more hydrogen ions (enough to make a neutral molecule) to produce
strong acids called **oxoacids** . A common example of an oxoacid is
nitric acid (HNO ~3~ ), which can be thought of as a hydrogen ion (H ^+^
) combining with a nitrate ion (NO ~3~ ^-^ ). If we simply named this as
an ionic compound, we could name the compound hydrogen nitrate. However,
because nitric acid exists as individual molecules and not an ionic
structure, we use a different convention. To name an oxoacid, look at
the anion that will be left behind when all acidic hydrogens have been
removed. If it ends in - *ate* , replace that suffix with - *ic acid* .
If it ends in - *ite* , replace that suffix with - *ous acid* . The
following **Table** [below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6T3hvYWNpZHM.) lists
some common oxoacids and their formulas:

  Formula        Name                      Anion         Name
  -------------- ------------------------- ------------- --------------------
  HClO ~4~       *per* chlor *ic* acid     ClO ~4~ ^-^   *per* chlor *ate*
  HClO ~3~       chlor *ic* acid           ClO ~3~ ^-^   chlor *ate*
  HClO ~2~       chlor *ous* acid          ClO ~2~ ^-^   chlor *ite*
  HClO           *hypo* chlor *ous* acid   ClO ^-^       *hypo* chlor *ite*
  HNO ~3~        nitr *ic* acid            NO ~3~ ^-^    nitr *ate*
  HNO ~2~        nitr *ous* acid           NO ~2~ ^-^    nitr *ite*
  H ~2~ SO ~4~   sulfur *ic* acid          SO ~4~ ^2-^   sulfate
  H ~2~ SO ~3~   sulfur *ous* acid         SO ~3~ ^2-^   sulf *ite*
  H ~2~ CO ~3~   carbon *ic* acid          CO ~3~ ^2-^   carbon *ate*
  H ~3~ PO ~4~   phosphor *ic* acid        PO ~4~ ^3-^   phosph *ate*

  :  Common Oxoacids

**Example 7.3**

Name the following compounds:

1.  HIO ~3~
2.  NaBrO ~2~
3.  Ca ~3~ (PO ~4~ ) ~2~
4.  H ~3~ PO ~3~

*Answer:*

1.  iodic acid
2.  sodium bromite
3.  calcium phosphate
4.  phosphorous acid

## Bases {#7.html#x-ck12-QmFzZXM._2-b3j}

Bases can also be defined in multiple ways, but for now, we will define
a **base** as a compound that produces the hydroxide (OH ^-^ ) ion when
dissolved in water. Most of the common strong bases that you will need
to deal with are simply ionic compounds in which a metal cation is
combined with the hydroxide anion. These bases are named in the same way
as any other ionic compound. For example, NaOH would be named sodium
hydroxide, and Ca(OH) ~2~ is calcium hydroxide.

Some common bases are listed in the **Table**
[below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtNy4xMQ..) .

  Formula      Name
  ------------ --------------------
  NaOH         sodium hydroxide
  Ca(OH) ~2~   calcium hydroxide
  NH ~4~ OH    ammonium hydroxide

  :  Examples of Bases

## Lesson Summary {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-aeu}

-   Acids are molecular compounds that dissolve in water to produce
    hydronium ions and an anion.

![\\mathrm{HA\_{(aq)}+H\_2O\_{(l)} \\rightarrow
A\^-\_{(aq)}+H\_3O\^+\_{(aq)}}](ck12_math_images_dir/a77f53a9c0245d724134571d74402bfd.png)

-   The naming rules for acids are based on the suffix of the anion.
    Formulas for acids are written by balancing out the charge of the
    anion with the appropriate number of hydrogen ions.
-   Bases are ionic compounds consisting of hydroxide ions and a cation.
    Naming and formula writing for bases follows the same guidelines as
    for other ionic compounds.

## Lesson Review Questions {#7.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-or3}

1.  How do acids behave in water?
2.  What defines a binary acid?
3.  What defines an oxoacid?
4.  How do bases behave in water?

<!-- -->

5.  Complete the following **Table**
    [below](#7.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6Ny4zLjE.) .

  \#                 Acid Name          Formula of Acid    Name of Anion
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  1.                 hydrobromic acid   HBr                bromide
  2.                 carbonic acid      H ~2~ CO ~3~       carbonate
  3.                                    HCl                
  4.                                                       sulfite
  5.                 chlorous acid                         
  6.                 nitric acid                           
  7.                                                       sulfide
  8.                                    HNO ~2~            
  9.                 chromic acid                          
  10.                                                      phosphate

6.  Name the following acids:
    1.  HF
    2.  HI
    3.  H ~2~ S
    4.  H ~3~ PO ~4~
    5.  H ~2~ SO ~4~

7.  Write the formulas for the following acids:
    1.  sulfurous acid
    2.  hydrosulfuric acid
    3.  nitric acid
    4.  carbonic acid
    5.  chloric acid

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#7.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-zil}

-   Chemical Nomenclature. (2012), from
    [http://www.chemteam.info/Nomenclature/Nomenclature.html](Nomenclature.html)
-   Video on acid-base nomenclature:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVgi74kswPA](watch?v=CVgi74kswPA)

## Points to Consider {#7.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-t4g}

-   Vinegar is an acid that can be produced from the aerobic
    fermentation of wine. In fact, vinegar is most likely the oldest
    known acid. It is commonly used as a food additive (to give things
    an acidic or sour taste) and as a mild cleaning agent.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686104] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#7.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-3ir}

1.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-chloride-3D-ionic.png](File:Sodium-chloride-3D-ionic.png) .
    Public Domain
2.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [(A)
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonium-3D-balls.png; (B)
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydroxide-3D-vdW.png; (C)
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carbonate-3D-balls.png](File:Carbonate-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain

<span id="8.html"></span>

# Ionic and Metallic Bonding {#8.html#x-ck12-SW9uaWMgYW5kIE1ldGFsbGljIEJvbmRpbmc.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_8_files/20151009235214566987.jpeg)
</span>

The image above shows the largest gold nugget ever discovered in
California, weighing 156 ounces. Gold is widely used for money,
decorative purposes, and various practical applications in fields such
as dentistry, electronics, and medicine. Its high malleability,
ductility, ability to conduct electricity, and resistance to corrosion
and most other chemical reactions make it a highly desirable material in
things like electric wiring, colored-glass production, and
corrosion-resistant jewelry and dishes. Gold is also one of the few
metals that occurs naturally in its pure form. Due to their tendency to
form cations, most naturally occurring metals are found as part of ionic
compounds. For example, aluminum is the most abundant metal on earth,
but it is rarely found in its elemental form. Instead, it is found as
the mineral bauxite, an ionic substance composed of aluminum cations and
oxygen anions. Pure aluminum must be extracted from minerals like
bauxite through chemical means. Pure metals have very different
properties than the ionic compounds that they can form with various
nonmetals. Additionally, metals can be mixed together to make alloys
that have different properties than either parent metal. In this
chapter, we will investigate and compare some of these different types
of substances.

^Chris\\ Ralph\\ (User:Reno\\ Chris/Wikipedia).\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stringer156\_nugget.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686106] -->

# Ions {#8.html#x-ck12-SW9ucw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-yae}

-   Explain how the periodic table can be used to predict the likely
    charges for ions of a given element.
-   Depict atoms and ions using electron dot notation.
-   Describe the octet rule and how it is used to explain
    chemical behavior.
-   Define and describe the arrangement of the valence electrons for a
    given chemical species.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-hym}

-   **octet rule** : States that elements tend to form compounds in ways
    that give each atom eight valence electrons.
-   **Lewis electron dot structure** : A diagram for a chemical
    substance in which each element is represented by its symbol and
    each valence electron is represented by a single dot.
-   **isoelectronic** : Two atoms or ions with the same number
    of electrons.
-   **cation** : A positively charged ion.
-   **anion** : A negatively charged ion.

## Check Your Understanding {#8.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-mbg}

-   How do ions differ from atoms? What types of elements form cations,
    and what types of elements form anions?

## Introduction {#8.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-njy}

As we studied in our chapter on the periodic table, we saw that elements
share a number of important properties with other elements found in the
same group. The chemical behavior of a given element is largely dictated
by the configuration of its valence electrons. Many elements have a
tendency to gain or lose electrons in order to achieve a more stable
configuration. When a neutral atom gains or loses electrons, it becomes
an ion. In this lesson, we will look at ways to predict what type of ion
a given element is likely to form.

## Octet Rule {#8.html#x-ck12-T2N0ZXQgUnVsZQ..-9qv}

The noble gases are unreactive because of their electron configurations.
American chemist Gilbert Lewis (1875-1946) used this observation to
explain the types of ions and molecules that are formed by other
elements. He called his explanation the octet rule. The **octet rule**
states that elements tend to form compounds in ways that give each atom
eight valence electrons. An exception to this rule is the elements in
the first period, which are particularly stable when they have two
valence electrons. A broader statement that encompasses both the octet
rule and this exception is that atoms react in order to achieve the same
valence electron configuration as that of the nearest noble gas. Most
noble gases have eight valence electrons, but because the first
principal energy level can hold a maximum of two electrons, the first
noble gas (helium) needs only two valence electrons to fill its
outermost energy level. As a result, the nearby elements hydrogen,
lithium, and beryllium tend to form stable compounds by achieving a
total of two valence electrons.

There are two ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet rule. One way is
by sharing their valence electrons with other atoms, which will be
covered in the next chapter. The second way is by transferring valence
electrons from one atom to another. Atoms of metallic elements tend to
lose all of their valence electrons, which leaves them with an octet
from the next lowest principal energy level. Atoms of nonmetallic
elements tend to gain electrons in order to fill their outermost
principal energy level with an octet.

## Electron Dot Diagrams {#8.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb24gRG90IERpYWdyYW1z-rut}

A common way to keep track of valence electrons is with **Lewis electron
dot structures** . In an electron dot structure, each atom is
represented by its chemical symbol, and each valence electron is
represented by a single dot. Note that only valence electrons are shown
explicitly in these diagrams. For the main group elements, the number of
valence electrons for a neutral atom can be determined by looking at
which group the element belongs to. In the s block, Group 1 elements
have one valence electron, while Group 2 elements have two valence
electrons. In the p block, the number of valence electrons is equal to
the group number minus ten. Group 13 elements have three valence
electrons, Group 14 elements have four, and so on. The noble gases in
Group 18 have eight valence electrons, and the full outer s and p
sublevels are what give these elements their special stability.
Representative dot diagrams are shown in the **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDItRWxlY3Ryb24tRG90cw..) :

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-YjJiN2QyNTlkMzRlYjY4MTJiMTFmZWZhZDk4ZmNiYmU.-ckx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung and Jodi So" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235214740081.png)

**Figure 8.1**

The image shown here displays dots circling each elemental symbol.
Elements will typically gain, lose or share electrons to achieve an
octet. Only one group of elements (the noble gases) has a complete octet
as neutral atoms.

</div>

## Cations and Anions {#8.html#x-ck12-Q2F0aW9ucyBhbmQgQW5pb25z-4kz}

Metals will typically lose electrons to achieve stability, while
non-metals typically gain electrons to achieve stability. Two atoms or
ions with the same number of electrons are referred to as
**isoelectronic** .

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-NTgyY2NlNzkyYzhmOTI5Y2FhMjBhOTY0Yjc4ZjgwZjg.-vkm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235214891871.png)

**Figure 8.2**

Cations and Anions

</div>

### Cations {#8.html#x-ck12-Q2F0aW9ucw..-n0k}

A positively charged ion is called a **cation** . Main group metals will
typically form ions by losing enough electrons to become isoelectronic
with the nearest noble gas. For example, lithium, whose configuration is
\[1s ^2^ 2s ^1^ \], will typically lose one electron to become
isoelectronic with helium, which has a configuration of \[1s ^2^ \] (see
**Figure** [above](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDItRWxlY3Ryb24tRG90cw..)
).

![\\mathrm{\\underset{\[He\]2s\^1}{Li} \\rightarrow
\\underset{\[He\]}{Li\^+} +
e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/a7e367c8924ca5cb3c5c42246c04d3b8.png)

Similarly, beryllium has 4 electrons (with the configuration \[1s ^2^ 2s
^2^ \]), so it prefers to lose two electrons, in order to become
isoelectronic with helium (again, \[1s ^2^ \]).

![\\mathrm{\\underset{\[He\]2s\^2}{Be} \\rightarrow
\\underset{\[He\]}{Be\^{2+}} +
2e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/97b7fa20374de7d11fd4b402c809c3de.png)

### Transition Metal Cations {#8.html#x-ck12-VHJhbnNpdGlvbiBNZXRhbCBDYXRpb25z-pvo}

As we saw in our chapter on the periodic table, the valence electrons
for transition metals are variable, and electrons in the highest
occupied d orbitals (which are not part of the valence shell) may or may
not be lost in the formation of a transition metal cation. As a result,
many transition metals commonly form more than one type of cation,
depending on how many d electrons are lost. **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDUtQXVmYmF1) depicts some of the
typical electron arrangements for the transition elements.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-MGMxMWFhYzExYTk5OWVkNWRmMGI3NTdlY2ZjYTMwNWQ.-w0g"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215025397.png)

**Figure 8.3**

This image shows the arrangement of electrons in their native,
chemically neutral state. Notice that chromium and manganese have a
half-filled d shell. Copper and zinc have fully filled d shells.

</div>

### Anions {#8.html#x-ck12-QW5pb25z-tas}

A negatively charged ion is called an **anion** . Nonmetals will
typically form ions by gaining enough electrons to become isoelectronic
with the nearest noble gas. For example, fluorine has 7 valence
electrons and is one electron away from being isoelectronic with neon,
which has a stable noble gas electron configuration (see **Figure**
[above](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDItRWxlY3Ryb24tRG90cw..) ).

![\\mathrm{\\underset{\[He\]2s\^22p\^5}{F} + e\^- \\rightarrow
\\underset{\[He\]2s\^22p\^6\\:or\\:\[Ne\]}{F\^-}}](ck12_math_images_dir/b2f12acad355460896a2a796b144647a.png)

Oxygen has 6 valence electrons in its ground state. Remember that ground
state refers to the neutral atom in which the electrons occupy the
lowest possible energy positions. Oxygen is two electrons away from
being isoelectronic with the nearest noble gas. Oxygen will therefore
form ions by gaining two electrons to become isoelectronic with neon, as
shown below:

![\\mathrm{\\underset{\[He\]2s\^22p\^4}{O} + 2e\^- \\rightarrow
\\underset{\[He\]2s\^22p\^6\\:or\\:\[Ne\]}{O\^{2-}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/957d78bcd87d98fe1efa18fd207d0718.png)

Similarly, nitrogen has five valence electrons in it ground state, which
is three electrons away from the nearest noble gas. Nitrogen can gain
three electrons to become isoelectronic with neon:

![\\mathrm{\\underset{\[He\]2s\^22p\^3}{N} + 3e\^- \\rightarrow
\\underset{\[He\]2s\^22p\^6\\:or\\:\[Ne\]}{N\^{3-}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/f88734194da7ac202cda23220b8b35c6.png)

**Example 8.1**

Write the ground state configuration for the nonmetal sulfur, and
predict the ion it must form to be isoelectronic with the nearest noble
gas.

*Answer:*

The ground state configuration for the nonmetal sulfur is written as: 1s
^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^4^ . Sulfur has 16 electrons. The nearest
noble gas to sulfur is argon, which has an electron configuration of: 1s
^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ 3p ^6^ . To be isoelectronic with argon, which
has 18 electrons, sulfur must gain two electrons. Therefore sulfur will
form a 2- ion, becoming S ^2-^ .

## Lesson Summary {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-qxe}

-   Atoms or groups of atoms that carry an overall electrical charge are
    referred to as ions. Cations can be formed when a neutral species
    loses electrons, while anions are formed when a neutral species
    gains electrons.
-   Particularly for main group elements, the number of electrons a
    given element has in its outer (valence) shell largely determines
    the chemical behavior of that element.
-   The octet rule states that atoms will lose, gain, or share electrons
    to achieve the electron configuration of the nearest noble gas (8
    valence electrons, except for helium, which has 2).
-   Electron dot diagrams are used to help us visualize the arrangement
    of valence electrons in a given chemical species.
-   When an element loses one or more electrons, a cation is formed.
    Metals typically become cations when they interact with other
    chemical species.
-   Some transition metals can produce ions with multiple different
    charges due to the optional participation of d electrons.
-   When an element gains one or more electrons, an anion is formed.
    Nonmetals typically become anions when they interact with other
    chemical species.

## Lesson Review Questions {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-zjh}

1.  Draw electron dot diagrams for one metal and one nonmetal.
2.  Predict whether each of the following is more likely to become a
    cation or an anion.
    1.  Ca
    2.  Na
    3.  F
    4.  Br
    5.  S

3.  Write the ground state electron configurations for the following
    elements, and predict the ion that will form when each atom becomes
    isoelectronic with the nearest noble gas.
    1.  Be
    2.  Mg
    3.  O
    4.  Al

4.  Describe the change that is happening when Li → Li ^+^ .
5.  What would be the electron configuration for Mg ^-^ ? Use the octet
    rule to explain why this is not likely to be a very stable ion.
6.  What would be the electron configuration for F ^+^ ? Use the octet
    rule to explain why this is not likely to be a very stable ion.
7.  Element X has a total of 16 electrons.
    1.  Write the electron configuration for element X.
    2.  How many electrons away from a complete octet is this element?
    3.  Make a prediction about the ion that this element might form in
        an ionic compound.

8.  Element Z has a total of 12 electrons.
    1.  Write the electron configuration for element Z.
    2.  How many electrons away from a complete octet is this element?
    3.  Make a prediction about the ion that this element might form in
        an ionic compound.

9.  Write the ground state configuration for the following elements.
    Then, show how the element ionizes to become isoelectronic with the
    nearest noble gas. Example: Mg \[1s ^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^6^ 3s ^2^ \]
    ![\\mathrm{\\underset{\[Ne\]2s\^2}{Mg} \\rightarrow
    \\underset{\[Ne\]}{Mg\^{2+}}+2e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/5e7b3ca67bc6ae62c4507dae9d423a98.png)
    1.  Na
    2.  Ca
    3.  N
    4.  Br
    5.  Al
    6.  Se

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#8.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-vpo}

-   Pough, Frederick. 1988. Rocks and Minerals, Peterson Field Guides.
    Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

## Points to Consider {#8.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-ykr}

-   So far, we have been discussing the fact that cations and anions
    form when electrons are lost or gained, respectively. However, the
    electrons must be lost to something or gained from something. Where
    are electrons lost to, and where do they originate from?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686106] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686107] -->

# Ionic Bonds and Ionic Compounds {#8.html#x-ck12-SW9uaWMgQm9uZHMgYW5kIElvbmljIENvbXBvdW5kcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-mik}

-   Describe the general properties that distinguish ionic compounds
    from other substances.
-   Define and give examples of ionic compounds. Be able to predict
    which elements are likely to form ionic compounds with each other.
-   Describe the crystal lattice structures adopted by ionic compounds.
-   Define lattice energy and explain what it measures.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-awu}

-   **ionic bond** : The resulting attraction between the positively
    charged cations and negatively charged anions
-   **crystal lattice** : A three-dimensional structure formed by ions
    in order to maximize the number of attractive interactions while
    minimizing the repulsive ones.
-   **lattice energy** : The amount of energy needed to completely pull
    apart an ionic substance into isolated ions.
-   **dissolution** : Occurs when water interacts with the ions in the
    crystal lattice, causing the lattice to break apart.

## Check Your Understanding {#8.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-rpy}

1.  Give some examples of commonly encountered ions.
2.  Draw electron dot diagrams for atoms of the following elements:
    1.  calcium
    2.  oxygen

## Introduction {#8.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-0ae}

In the last section, we saw that elements may lose or gain electrons to
become isoelectronic with the nearest noble gas. Where do the electrons
go when an element loses them to become a cation? Where do electrons
come from when an element gains them to become an anion? For an atom to
gain or lose electrons, there must be an interaction between two
different chemical species. If electrons are fully exchanged, then we
consider this interaction to be ionic. The resulting attractions between
the positively charged cations and the negatively charged anions are
referred to as **ionic bonds** .

## Ionic Bonds {#8.html#x-ck12-SW9uaWMgQm9uZHM._1-rlh}

As we saw in earlier chapters, the electrons in the outermost (valence)
shell of an atom are largely responsible for the ways in which that atom
will interact with other elements. For example, **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDYtRWxlY3Ryb24tQXJyYW5nZW1lbnRz)
shows the electron configurations of sodium (11 e ^-^ , 1 valence e ^-^
), neon (10 e ^-^ , 8 valence e ^-^ ), and fluorine (9 e ^-^ , 7 valence
e ^-^ ).

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-ZjlhODgwNmU1MmZkYTljNTg0YWEzNzYyM2VkMTVlZDU.-u1g"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215125406.png)

**Figure 8.4**

This image shows the arrangement of electrons in their ground states for
sodium, neon, and fluorine.

</div>

Our model of ionic bonding and chemical reactivity states that sodium
and fluorine have a strong driving force to become isoelectronic with
the nearest noble gas, neon. Because sodium needs to lose one electron
and fluorine needs to gain one for this to occur, one atom of sodium can
give up its valence electron to a fluorine atom, resulting in two ions
with noble gas configurations matching that of neon ( **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDctU29kaXVtLUZsdW9yaW5l) ). The
positive and negative ion are held tightly together by electrostatic
forces, which are strong forces between oppositely charged particles.
When large groups of sodium and fluorine atoms react in this way, the
result is the ionic compound, sodium fluoride.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-MWZmMmFlNTllYmM2YWVmNDQ4OGFlZGRjN2YxODcxNmQ.-k9j"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215260350.png)

**Figure 8.5**

Electron arrangements for sodium fluoride.

</div>

## Crystal Lattices {#8.html#x-ck12-Q3J5c3RhbCBMYXR0aWNlcw.._1-qhb}

Any ionic compound is composed of extremely large numbers of cations and
anions. Each cation is attracted by all of the anions but repelled by
all the other cations, and vice versa. In order to maximize the number
of attractive interactions while minimizing the repulsive ones, the ions
form a three-dimensional structure known as a **crystal lattice** .
There are a variety of lattice forms that ionic compounds can exhibit,
but all of them involve a regular, repeating pattern in which cations
and anions are held rigidly in place by various neighboring ions. For
example, sodium fluoride takes the form of a cubic lattice, shown here (
**Figure** [below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDgtU29kaXVtLUZsdW9yaWRl)
):

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-NjE1ZmJjMzg3NzBkYjUwOTZjZGIyZTg4MTI3ZjM5ZDU.-psc"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-fluoride-3D-ionic.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215370576.png)

**Figure 8.6**

Crystal Lattice for Sodium Fluoride

</div>

Some properties of the crystal form that are exhibited at the atomic
level can also be seen at the macroscopic level. Due to the cubic
arrangement of ions in sodium fluoride, a single pure crystal of this
compound will tend to have smooth faces at right angles to one another (
**Figure** [below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMDktVmlsbGF1bWl0ZQ..) ).

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-YWI0YTc4YjM4YmZlNjk2NGNiYTY1MjJjNDNjNjFkMzk.-ial"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Stickpen/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Villiaumite-russia.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215470849.jpeg)

**Figure 8.7**

Crystals of Villiaumite, a rare mineral composed of sodium fluoride.

</div>

### Lattice Energy {#8.html#x-ck12-TGF0dGljZSBFbmVyZ3k._1-jvf}

There are a number of different ways to measure the strength of a given
crystal lattice. One way would be to measure the amount of energy needed
to completely pull apart an ionic substance into isolated ions. This
value, known as the **lattice energy** , cannot be measured directly,
but it can be calculated based on measured energy changes for other more
feasible processes. The lattice energy of an ionic solid provides us
with one way to measure the relative strength of the ionic bonds in that
compound. **Table** [below](#8.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6QkNoZW0tVGFibGUtOC4x)
shows the lattice energies for various ionic substances:

  Compound   Lattice Energy (kJ/mol)   Compound   Lattice Energy (kJ/mol)
  ---------- ------------------------- ---------- -------------------------
  LiF        1030                      KBr        671
  LiCl       834                       CsCl       657
  LiI        730                       CsI        600
  NaF        910                       MgCl ~2~   2326
  NaCl       788                       SrCl ~2~   2127
  NaBr       732                       MgO        3795
  NaI        682                       CaO        3414
  KF         808                       SrO        3217
  KCl        701                       ScN        7547

  :  Lattice Energies for Some Ionic Compounds

## Properties of Ionic Compounds {#8.html#x-ck12-UHJvcGVydGllcyBvZiBJb25pYyBDb21wb3VuZHM._1-pod}

Ionic compounds exhibit certain properties, some of which are listed
below:

-   All ionic compounds form crystals.
-   Ionic compounds tend to have high melting points and boiling points.
-   Ionic compounds are very hard and very brittle.
-   Ionic compounds conduct electricity when dissolved in water.

The last property above requires some additional explanation. We are all
familiar with the process of dissolution on a large scale. If you stir a
spoonful of salt into a glass of water, the salt crystals are broken
down and seem to disappear into the water. On the atomic level, the
**dissolution** of an ionic compound occurs when water interacts with
the ions in the crystal lattice, causing the lattice to break apart (
**Figure** [below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTAtRGlzc29sdXRpb24.) ):

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-MWQ2OGM0OTVkZTNiZGJhMGIzZmUxZjI1YzUyMDhkNDA.-7nf"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215577749.png)

**Figure 8.8**

Dissolution of NaCl.

</div>

Once the ions are dissolved, the presence of charged particles
distributed throughout the liquid allows the solution to conduct
electricity ( **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTEtQ29uZHVjdGl2aXR5) ). The more
ions that are freed from the lattice, the more conductive the solution
will be.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-Yjk3ZDg0NDBmMzg2MDY4YThhZGY3OThkOGI0Y2Q0MTY.-xz8"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235215690158.png)

**Figure 8.9**

Conductivity of ionic solutions.

</div>

Below is a summary of some common ionic compounds and their practical
applications ( **Table** [below](#8.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtOC4y) ):

  Formula     Name                        Common name   Uses
  ----------- --------------------------- ------------- --------------------------------------
  NaCl        Sodium chloride             Table salt    Food additive
  NaHCO ~3~   Sodium hydrogen carbonate   Baking soda   Mild cleaner, antacid
  NaOH        Sodium hydroxide            Lye           Drain cleaner
  NaF         Sodium fluoride             n/a           Active ingredient in toothpaste
  NaOCl       Sodium hypochlorite         Bleach        Mild or strong cleaner, disinfectant

  :  Common Examples of Ionic compounds

## Lesson Summary {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-7gj}

-   Ionic bonds are electrostatic attractions between two oppositely
    charged ions. Ions can be formed and then bonded when metal atoms
    donate their valence electrons to nonmetal atoms.
-   The ions in ionic compounds are arranged in rigid three-dimensional
    patterns called crystal lattices. The crystal lattice that is formed
    is a characteristic property of a given compound.
-   We can indirectly measure the energy necessary to break apart a
    given lattice into its isolated ions. We call this value the lattice
    energy, and it gives us one way to measure the strength of the ionic
    bonds in that compound.
-   Ionic compounds have the following properties: (1) they form
    crystals; (2) they have high melting/boiling points; (3) they are
    hard and brittle; (4) they can conduct electricity when dissolved
    in water.
-   Dissolution is a process in which water interacts with the ions in a
    crystal lattice, causing the lattice to break apart.

## Lesson Review Questions {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-3h6}

1.  How do the electrons from two atoms interact in an ionic bond?
2.  Predict the formulas for the ionic compounds formed when each of the
    metals in the **Table**
    [below](#8.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6UHJvYmxlbS04LjIuMg..) reacts with
    each nonmetal.

                     Oxygen             Sulfur             Chlorine
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  **Calcium**                                              
  **Sodium**                                               
  **Aluminum**                                             

3.  What is dissolution?
4.  If sodium chloride is placed in water, it will completely dissociate
    into its ionic components, described by the dissociation equation:
    ![\\mathrm{NaCl\_{(s)} \\rightarrow Na\^+\_{(aq)} +
    Cl\^-\_{(aq)}}](ck12_math_images_dir/00001038178c5b169740bbddc4dd1aad.png) .
    (The (aq) signifies an aqueous solution, or a solution in which the
    ions are dissolved in water.) Write a similar dissociation equation
    for the solid ionic compound calcium chloride.
5.  Which physical properties of ionic compounds can be attributed to
    the crystal lattice structure?
6.  How does lattice energy relate to the strength of an ionic compound?
7.  True or false: The high melting points of ionic solids suggest that
    ionic bonds are fairly weak.
8.  Using **Table** [above](#8.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6QkNoZW0tVGFibGUtOC4x)
    as a reference, what trend can be recognized between lattice energy
    and the characteristics of the ions which comprise the compound? For
    example, NaF, NaCl, NaBr, NaI have lattice energies (kJ/mol) of 910,
    788, 732, and 682, respectively. What is different between the
    anions that may be causing such differences?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#8.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-wsq}

-   Animation of Sodium chloride dissolution:
    [http://www.mhhe.com/physsci/chemistry/essentialchemistry/flash/molvie1.swf](molvie1.swf)

## Points to Consider {#8.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-mtj}

-   We have generally assumed that ionic compounds are composed of metal
    cations and nonmetal anions. While this is common, there are ionic
    compounds in which no metal is involved. For example, the ammonium
    cation is positively charged but does not involve any metal atoms.
    Similarly, some polyatomic anions are not solely comprised of
    nonmetallic atoms. What are some examples of these anions?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686107] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686108] -->

# Metals and Metallic Bonds {#8.html#x-ck12-TWV0YWxzIGFuZCBNZXRhbGxpYyBCb25kcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-ame}

-   Describe the general properties of metals compared to other
    element types.
-   Describe the arrangement of atoms in metallic substances.
-   Describe the behavior of electrons in metals.
-   Define and give examples of alloys.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-7iv}

-   **malleable** : When pure metals are able to be stamped, pressed, or
    rolled into thin sheets.
-   **ductile** : Metal that can be stretched, bent, or twisted
    without breaking.
-   **toughness** : The ability of a material to withstand shock and to
    be deformed without rupturing.
-   **luster** : When pure metals tend to be shiny in appearance.
-   **corrosion** : The gradual degradation of a material due to its
    exposure to the environment.
-   **metallic bond** : The attraction of the stationary metal cations
    to the surrounding mobile electrons.
-   **alloy** : A mixture of pure metals.
-   **amalgam** : An alloy that is mostly composed of mercury.

## Check Your Understanding {#8.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-odj}

1.  Identify the ions that make up the following compounds:
    1.  NaCl
    2.  BaSO ~4~
    3.  K ~2~ O

2.  How many valence electrons do the neutral atoms of metals in Groups
    1, 2, and 3 in the periodic table have?

## Introduction {#8.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-ovz}

Metals represent approximately 25% of the elemental makeup of the
Earth's crust. The bulk of these metals, primarily aluminum, iron,
calcium, sodium, potassium, and magnesium, are typically found in
combined form. The most abundant metal is aluminum, which occurs almost
exclusively as the ionic mineral bauxite. The other most common metals,
including iron, sodium, potassium, magnesium, and calcium, are also
found primarily as the cationic portion of an ionic compound. Very few
metals actually occur naturally as pure substances. The ones that do are
often referred to as precious or semi-precious metals.

As pure substances, metals are tough, yet malleable. They are strong,
and some of them are quite resistant to corrosion. They are also good
conductors of electricity and heat. Due to these and other useful
properties, pure metals have been valued for millennia. In this lesson,
we are going to investigate a few properties of metals and the chemical
reasons behind some of these characteristics.

## Properties of Metals {#8.html#x-ck12-UHJvcGVydGllcyBvZiBNZXRhbHM._2-sl9}

### Physical Properties {#8.html#x-ck12-UGh5c2ljYWwgUHJvcGVydGllcw.._2-ua3}

Most pure metals share a number of physical properties. Metals are good
conductors of electricity and heat. They are also **malleable** , which
means that they can be stamped, pressed, or rolled into thin sheets. For
example, aluminum foil can be made into sheets that are only 13 μm
thick, and gold (the most malleable pure metal) can be hammered so thin
that it is practically transparent. Metals also tend to be **ductile** ,
which means that they can be stretched, bent, or twisted without
breaking. The copper wire shown in **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTMtQ29wcGVy) is an example of this.
Both of these properties are facets of **toughness** , which is a term
that describes the ability of a material to withstand shock and to be
deformed without rupturing.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-YjI3MTU3NzY2OTM4MzViYzRiZTAyNWJhMThkZjBiOWU.-fac"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Flegere, 2014" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235216141707.jpeg)

**Figure 8.10**

This image shows a variety of different copper wires. Copper is a
commonly used substance for wire because it is highly conductive and
ductile but also very abundant (and therefore inexpensive).

</div>

Pure metals tend to be shiny in appearance; this property is referred to
as **luster** . Due to our everyday experiences, we may think of metals
as being mostly dull gray in color. However, this is due not to the pure
metal but to a surface layer in which the pure metal has formed an ionic
compound, usually with oxygen atoms from either air or water. Most pure
metals are silver-white, but some of the heavier ones (most notably,
gold) take on a yellowish hue.

### Chemical Properties {#8.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgUHJvcGVydGllcw.._2-oum}

We have already discussed some of the chemical properties of pure
metals.  They have just a few valence electrons (generally 1-3), which
tend to be fairly easy to remove due to metals low ionization energy and
electronegativity values.  As a result, they frequently form ionic
compounds by transferring their valence electrons to nonmetallic atoms,
which use these extra electrons to complete their valence shells and
achieve noble gas configurations.

The driving force to combine with nonmetals to create ionic compounds
varies quite a bit between different metals.  Some pure metals, like
cesium and potassium, are so eager to react that they must be stored
under oil to avoid an immediate reaction with the oxygen present in air.
 Others, like platinum and gold, are stable enough that they can be
found in nature as pure metals rather than as the cationic portion of an
ionic compound.  Gradual degradation of a material due to its exposure
to the environment is known as **corrosion** .  Metals like gold and
platinum are unusually resistant to corrosion, which makes them
especially valuable for both structural and decorative purposes.

Metals have a wide range of melting points, but most are quite high.
Only one metal (mercury) melts below room temperature. Others (such as
gallium) are solid at room temperature but would melt at body
temperature, so they can be melted simply by holding them in your hand.
On the other end of the spectrum, tungsten has a melting point of
3422°C. **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTQtTWVsdGluZy1Qb2ludHM.) shows the
melting points of various elements in their most common pure form.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-ZmI2NGYxYWVhZDQ0N2FlNjQ2NDUxYjQzODYyNDIyYTc.-3do"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235216264905.png)

**Figure 8.11**

Melting Points of the Metallic Elements

</div>

### The "Sea of Electrons" {#8.html#x-ck12-VGhlICJTZWEgb2YgRWxlY3Ryb25zIg.._2-90g}

The reason metals behave the way they do can largely be explained by the
ways that metal atoms bond together to make a solid material. Pure
metals are crystalline solids, but unlike ionic compounds, every point
in the crystal lattice is occupied by an identical atom. The electrons
in the outer energy levels of a metal are mobile and capable of drifting
from one metal atom to another. This means that the metal is more
properly viewed as an array of positive ions surrounded by a "sea" of
mobile valence electrons ( **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTktRWxlY3Ryb24tU2Vh) ). Electrons
that are capable of moving freely throughout the empty valence orbitals
of the metallic crystal are said to be delocalized. A **metallic bond**
is the attraction of the stationary metal cations to the surrounding
mobile electrons.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-ZDM0OTI1N2NiOWIyNTY4MDYyMzBjMGI5ODljYWUwMzA.-rr8"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235216450440.png)

**Figure 8.12**

Electron Sea Illustration

</div>

This model for metallic bonding explains some of the physical properties
of metals. Metals conduct electricity and heat very well because of
their free-flowing electrons. As electrons enter one end of a piece of
metal, an equal number of electrons flow outward from the other end,
allowing an electrical current to pass through the material with minimal
resistance. Additionally, because the electron "glue" that holds the
metal atoms together is very easy to deform and reshape, bulk metals can
be easily hammered, bent, and pulled without breaking apart.

## Types of Metals {#8.html#x-ck12-VHlwZXMgb2YgTWV0YWxz_2-oa6}

### Precious Metals {#8.html#x-ck12-UHJlY2lvdXMgTWV0YWxz_2-kod}

A number of relatively rare metals are quite resistant to corrosion.
These metals are sometimes referred to as precious metals due to their
scarcity and their ability to remain pure over time. The exact list
varies, but metals that are usually classified as precious include gold,
silver, ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum.
Some precious metals are shown in ( **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTUtUHJlY2lvdXMtTWV0YWxz) ). Compared
to other metals, precious metals tend to have relatively high ionization
energies and electronegativity values.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-ZjRkNjM0YzgzMTEyMDMyNDc4MmQ2YTk0NTk2M2U4M2E.-5fr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements" -->
<!-- @@url="http://images-of-elements.com" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235216555184.jpeg)

**Figure 8.13**

Precious metals

</div>

### Rare Earth Metals {#8.html#x-ck12-UmFyZSBFYXJ0aCBNZXRhbHM._2-zsj}

The rare earth metals are a set of seventeen chemical elements (the
lanthanide series plus scandium and yttrium) that have particular
importance for a variety of industrial processes and are used frequently
in modern technology. Despite their name, rare earth metals are actually
relatively abundant in the earth’s crust. However, the extraction of
many of these metals is quite difficult and has made their supply
somewhat limited. They are highly sought after for this reason.
**Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTYtUmFyZS1FYXJ0aC1NZXRhbHM.) shows
the rare earth metals.

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-NGRiZGVjMjA5YWQyNTZhMGYwNjk2NzhjM2E3ZGZjYWM.-1gt"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements" -->
<!-- @@url="http://images-of-elements.com" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235216760517.jpeg)

**Figure 8.14**

Rare earth metals

</div>

### Alloys {#8.html#x-ck12-QWxsb3lz_2-hyc}

In addition to being used in their pure elemental forms, metals can be
melted down and combined with other metals (and sometimes small amounts
of nonmetals) to form mixtures known as **alloys** . The properties of
alloys are often quite different than the properties of the base
elements from which they formed. For example, iron is often mixed with
small amounts of carbon or other metals to create steels. By modifying
the relative amounts of the added components, properties like hardness,
flexibility, and corrosion resistance can be fine-tuned so that the
material is suitable for a particular application. For example,
elemental iron corrodes readily in air and water (see **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTgtUGlwZQ..) ), but stainless steel
(which is still mostly iron, but contains about 10-12% chromium by mass)
resists corrosion to a large extent. It is used as an exterior building
material for extravagant buildings such as that shown in **Figure**
[below](#8.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDgtMTctQnVpbGRpbmc.) .

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-Y2MxZjAyNDhiZjQwNGUyN2E5ZWRhNDY1YjAwNWI0Y2E.-mjp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Mark (Flickr:RelentlesslyOptimistic)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/relentlesslyoptimistic/5032289/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235216893332.jpeg)

**Figure 8.15**

Corroded iron pipe.

</div>

<div id="8.html#x-ck12-NjI3MzhkNDFkOWJmYTJkZTI4Y2NjMjFiODgwNTJiNTA.-zbu"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Arturoramos/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Walt_Disney_Concert_Hall_Across_Grand.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_8_files/20151009235217113494.jpeg)

**Figure 8.16**

Most of the exterior of the Walt Disney Concert Hall pictured here is
stainless steel.

</div>

Alloys that are mostly composed of mercury are known as **amalgams** .
Amalgams often have special properties that stem from the fact that
mercury exists as a liquid at room temperature. As a result, metal
amalgams are used for a variety of purposes, including dentistry and the
extraction of other pure metals such as gold.

## Lesson Summary {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-esz}

-   Physical properties that are common to metals include malleability,
    ductility, toughness, and luster.
-   Chemical properties of metals include the abilities to conduct heat
    and electricity.
-   Many of the properties of metals are due to the presence of metallic
    bonds, in which metal atoms are held together by a mutually shared
    "sea" of valence electrons.
-   Metal atoms lose electrons readily to other chemical species,
    forming cations that can participate in ionic bonds.
-   Precious metals are relatively rare and often can be found naturally
    as a pure metal rather than as part of an ionic compound.
-   Rare earth metals are an important set of metals because of their
    use in a variety of modern industrial applications.
-   Alloys are solid mixtures of two or more metals (sometimes with
    small amounts of a nonmetal, such as carbon). The properties of
    alloys may be quite different than the properties of the pure
    elements from which they are formed.

## Lesson Review Questions {#8.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-bku}

1.  Define the following properties of metals
    1.  malleability
    2.  ductility
    3.  toughness
    4.  luster

2.  In metal solids, the \_\_\_\_\_\_ electrons form a shared sea
    of electrons.
3.  What is corrosion as it applies to metals?
4.  In general, what can be said of the melting points of metals?
5.  Define a metallic bond.
6.  What is the relationship between the electron arrangement in metals
    and metals' physical properties?
7.  What atomic properties distinguish "precious metals" from metals in
    general?
8.  Why are "rare metals" so valuable?
9.  How are alloys formed?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#8.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-lxr}

-   Metallic Bonding Animation/Video:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c4udBSZfLHY](watch?v=c4udBSZfLHY)
-   Use of Different Types of Alloys:
    [http://www.articlesnatch.com/Article/Uses-Of-Different-Types-Of-Alloys/599802](599802)

## Points to Consider {#8.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-tdm}

-   The following image is of a sword constructed of an alloy known as
    Damascus steel.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_8_files/20151009235217269720.jpeg)
</span>

Notice the mottling pattern, reminiscent of flowing water. Damascus
steel blades were a product of medieval times and were highly regarded
for their toughness, resistance to shattering, and their capability to
be honed and sharpened with a resilient edge. Even to this day, it is
still debated as to exactly how Damascus steel was made.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686108] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#8.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-f5r}

1.  Christopher Auyeung and Jodi So. [CK-12
    Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
2.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
3.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
4.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
5.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
6.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-fluoride-3D-ionic.png](File:Sodium-fluoride-3D-ionic.png) .
    Public Domain
7.  User:Stickpen/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Villiaumite-russia.jpg](File:Villiaumite-russia.jpg) .
    Public Domain
8.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
9.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
10. Image copyright Flegere, 2014.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
11. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
12. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
13. Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements.
    [http://images-of-elements.com](images-of-elements.com) . CC BY 3.0
14. Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements.
    [http://images-of-elements.com](images-of-elements.com) . CC BY 3.0
15. Mark (Flickr:RelentlesslyOptimistic).
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/relentlesslyoptimistic/5032289/]() .
    CC BY 2.0
16. User:Arturoramos/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Walt\_Disney\_Concert\_Hall\_Across\_Grand.jpg](File:Walt_Disney_Concert_Hall_Across_Grand.jpg) .
    CC BY 3.0

<span id="9.html"></span>

# Covalent Bonding {#9.html#x-ck12-Q292YWxlbnQgQm9uZGluZw..-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235221374075.jpeg)
</span>

Water and diamonds – two very different materials. Water can be found
almost everywhere. It is in lakes, creeks, rivers, and oceans. We get
water from the sky when it rains. Diamonds, on the other hand, are very
rare. They are only found in a few locations on the earth and must be
mined to become available. Major diamond mines are located in various
African countries, Australia, and Russia. The United States has several
underground sources of diamonds in Alaska, Colorado, Minnesota, Montana,
and Wyoming, but the only “active” U.S. mine is the Crater of Diamonds
mine in a state park near Murfreesboro, Arkansas. For a small fee,
visitors can dig for diamonds. You won’t get rich by visiting, though –
only a few hundred carats of low-grade diamonds are found each year.

The two materials do have at least one thing in common. The atoms in the
materials are held together by covalent bonds. These bonds consist of
electrons shared between two or more atoms. Unlike ionic bonds, where
electrons are either lost or gained by an atom to form charged ions,
electrons in covalent compounds are shared between the two atoms, giving
rise to properties that are quite different from those seen in ionic
materials.

^Waterfall:\\ Beth\\ CreMeens\\ (Flickr:vikingsgonnapillage).\\ www.flickr.com/photos/vikingsgonnapillage/8729855112/.\\ CC\\ BY\\ 2.0.^

^Diamond:\\ Ruby\\ Grace\\ Ong.\\ www.flickr.com/photos/rubychild/4233515265/.\\ CC\\ BY\\ 2.0.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686110] -->

# Lewis Electron Dot Structures {#9.html#x-ck12-TGV3aXMgRWxlY3Ryb24gRG90IFN0cnVjdHVyZXM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-luk}

-   Define and give examples of covalent bonds.
-   Describe the differences between ionic and covalent bonds.
-   Describe Lewis structures.
-   Use Lewis structures to illustrate covalent bonds in molecules.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-0et}

-   **covalent bond** : Forms when two or more elements share electrons.
-   **Lewis structure** : One way of representing covalent bonds.
-   **lone pair** : An unbonded pair of electrons.
-   **double bond** : A covalent bond in which each atom shares 2
    valence electrons.
-   **triple bond** : A covalent bond in which each atom shares 3
    valence electrons.

## Check Your Understanding {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-nns}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#9.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ..-upb}

-   What are valence electrons?
-   How are electrons configured in s and p orbitals?
-   What are electron dot diagrams?
-   What is the octet rule?
-   What are ions?

## Introduction {#9.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-rdj}

Ionic substances are completely held together by ionic bonds. The full
charges of the ions (for example, Na ^+^ and Cl ^-^ in sodium chloride)
cause electrostatic interactions that result in a stable crystal
lattice. We saw in the previous chapter that most ionic compounds have
high melting points, are brittle, are often soluble in water, and
conduct electricity when melted or dissolved in water. Ionic compounds
exist as extended, orderly arrangements of ions. As we will see, this is
quite different from the structure of molecular substances, which take
the form of collections of individual molecules. The atoms within a
molecule are held very strongly together, but the interactions between
different molecules are significantly weaker.

Ionic bonds are possible because the elements involved have either
donated or accepted one or more electrons. Sodium chloride is formed
when each sodium atom donates its single valence electron to a chlorine
atom. As a result, both ions have a noble gas configuration, and an
attraction is formed between the positive sodium ions and the negative
chloride ions.

Another type of bond is also found in numerous compounds. A **covalent
bond** forms when two or more elements share electrons. The electrons
that form a covalent bond are not fully possessed by a single atom (as
the electrons in an ion would be) but are shared between the two atoms
involved in the bond. The concept of the covalent bond was first
proposed in 1916 by the American chemist G.N. Lewis (1875-1946), who
suggested that sharing electrons was one way that atoms could attain a
complete octet of valence electrons. This idea was expanded upon by
Linus Pauling (1901-1994), who eventually won the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 1954 for his work on chemical bonding.

## Single Covalent Bonds {#9.html#x-ck12-U2luZ2xlIENvdmFsZW50IEJvbmRz-vsh}

Covalent bonding involves sharing of electrons in s and p orbitals. The
simplest covalent bond is formed between two hydrogen atoms. Each
hydrogen atom has a single 1s electron, and each needs two electrons for
a full outer shell. The hydrogen molecule, H ~2~ , consists of two
hydrogen atoms sharing their two valence electrons. Hydrogen can also
form covalent bonds with other atoms. For example, hydrogen and chlorine
each need one more electron to achieve a noble gas configuration. By
sharing valence electrons (each atom donates one), the stable HCl
molecule is formed.

Later in this chapter, we will learn how to draw covalent bonds using
orbitals, but a simplified representation of covalent bonds can be drawn
using **Lewis structures** , which were developed by G.N. Lewis in 1916.
These drawings are also known by various other names, including Lewis
dot structures or electron dot structures, as we introduced in the
previous chapter. Each dot in the structure represents one valence
electron in the compound. For example, H ~2~ could be drawn as H:H. Each
dot represents one valence electron, and the fact that they are placed
between the two atoms means that they are being shared as a covalent
bond. For larger molecules, it can become cumbersome to draw out all of
the valence electrons, so a bonding pair of electrons can also be drawn
as a straight line. Thus, H ~2~ can also be represented as H-H.

If we wanted to show the Lewis structure of HCl, we would draw the
following:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235221511519.jpeg)
</span>

We can see that the covalent bond consists of two electrons between the
H and the Cl. The H has a full outer shell of two electrons and the
chlorine has a full outer shell of eight electrons. Covalent bonds with
other halogens can be written the same way.

Similar types of Lewis structures can be written for other molecules
that form covalent bonds. Many compounds that contain O, N, C, S, and P
are held together by covalent bonds. The number of covalent bonds an
atom will form can generally be predicted by the number of electrons an
atom requires to fill its valence shell. For example, oxygen has 6
electrons in its outer shell and needs two more to fill this shell, so
it will only form two covalent bonds with other atoms. If we look at the
water molecule (H ~2~ O) (see **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fOV80X0VsZWt0cm9uZW5mb3JtZWxfUHVua3Rl) ),
we see that the oxygen atom makes two total bonds (one with each
hydrogen atom):

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-YzIyZDhlYjE4NzlkNzIwMWNlOTQ3ZDgyMmU1ZTk0NzY.-oqs"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Apostoloff/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Elektronenformel_Punkte_H20.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235221717242.png)

**Figure 9.1**

Electron sharing in a water molecule.

</div>

As you can see, there are two pairs of electrons not involved in
covalent bonding. These unbonded pairs of electrons are known as **lone
pairs** and contribute to the overall shape of the molecule. Similarly,
nitrogen needs three electrons to complete its valence shell, so it
tends to make three covalent bonds, with one lone pair of non-bonding
electrons left over:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235221834383.png) </span>

Again, each of the lines stands for a *pair* of bonding electrons (a
single bond), and the lone pair on nitrogen is drawn as two dots.

## Double and Triple Bonds {#9.html#x-ck12-RG91YmxlIGFuZCBUcmlwbGUgQm9uZHM.-3c2}

So far we have considered only single bonds, formed by the sharing of
one electron from each atom. Many molecules contain **double bonds** ,
in which each atom shares two electrons, or **triple bonds** , in which
each atom shares three electrons. These are represented by drawing two
or three lines in between the bonded atoms. For example, a carbon-carbon
double bond can be written as C::C or C=C. A carbon-carbon triple bond
is shown as C:::C or with three lines between the two carbon atoms, as
seen in the structure of an organic molecule called acetylene (shown in
**Figure** [below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fOV82X0FjZXR5bGVuZQ..) ).

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-MTg4NjkwNGYzYTViMTNkNGY4NDJhZmY0OGU4ZDVhODM.-w8y"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons and User:Sarregouset/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetylene-2D.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235221946874.png)

**Figure 9.2**

Acetylene molecule

</div>

## Steps for Drawing Lewis Structures {#9.html#x-ck12-U3RlcHMgZm9yIERyYXdpbmcgTGV3aXMgU3RydWN0dXJlcw..-jt3}

1.  Identify the atoms that are participating in a covalent bond.
2.  Draw each atom by using its element symbol. The number of valence
    electrons is shown by placing up to two dots on each side of the
    element symbol, with each dot representing a single
    valence electron.
3.  Predict the number of covalent bonds each atom will make using the
    octet rule.
4.  Draw the bonding atoms next to each other, showing a single covalent
    bond as either a pair of dots or a line representing a shared
    valence electron pair. If the molecule forms a double or triple
    bond, use two or three lines to represent the shared electron
    pairs, respectively.

## Lesson Summary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-t2f}

-   Covalent bonds are formed between atoms sharing electrons.
-   Lewis structures are a simple way of representing covalent bonds.
    The shared valence electrons can be drawn using dots to represent
    individual valence electrons, or lines to represent shared
    electron pairs.
-   A pair of valence electrons in a bonded atom that does not
    participate in bonding is called a lone pair. Lone pair electrons
    contribute to molecular shape.
-   Atoms can form double or triple covalent bonds as well, in which
    each atom shares two valence electrons (double bond) or three
    valence electrons (triple bond).

## Lesson Review Questions {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-8bb}

1.  How is a covalent bond formed?
2.  What is the major difference between a covalent bond and an ionic
    bond?
3.  What orbitals are used in covalent bonding?
4.  What types of elements generally form covalent bonds?
5.  How do double and triple covalent bonds differ from single covalent
    bonds?
6.  Predict the number of covalent bonds the following atoms will make:
    1.  N (nitrogen)
    2.  S (sulfur)
    3.  Br (bromine)
    4.  F (fluorine)

7.  Draw Lewis structures for the following molecules:
    1.  HBr
    2.  CO ~2~
    3.  NCl ~3~
    4.  PCl ~5~

8.  Determine how many lone pairs are present in each of the molecules
    from the problem above.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#9.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-zor}

-   An extensive collection of materials showing the contributions made
    by Linus Pauling to our understanding of the chemical bond:
    [http://osulibrary.oregonstate.edu/specialcollections/coll/pauling/bond/]()
-   Practice drawing Lewis Dot Structures of Covalent Compounds:
    [http://www.wisc-online.com/objects/ViewObject.aspx?ID=GCH6404](ViewObject.aspx?ID=GCH6404)

## Points to Consider {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-95z}

-   What happens to the valence shell electrons not involved in a
    covalent bond?
-   How do the lone pair electrons affect molecular shape?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686110] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686111] -->

# Molecular Geometry {#9.html#x-ck12-TW9sZWN1bGFyIEdlb21ldHJ5}

## Lesson Objectives {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-xhz}

-   Explain the basis of VSEPR theory.
-   Predict the shapes of molecules and polyatomic ions using
    VSEPR theory.
-   Account for variations in bond angles based on the relative
    repulsive forces exerted by lone pairs and bonding pairs
    of electrons.
-   Describe the relationship between molecular geometry and electron
    domain geometry.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-ee3}

-   **molecular geometry** : The three-dimensional arrangement of atoms
    in a molecule.
-   **valence shell** : The outermost occupied shell of electrons in
    an atom.
-   **valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory** : States
    that a molecule will adjust its shape so that the valence electron
    pairs stay as far apart from each other as possible.
-   **electron domain geometry** : The number of atoms bonded to the
    central atom plus the number of lone pairs on the central atom.

## Check Your Understanding {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-efe}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#9.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._1-non}

-   How are Lewis electron dot structures determined?
-   What are bonding pairs of electrons and what are lone pairs?

## Introduction {#9.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-aoq}

**Molecular geometry** is the three-dimensional arrangement of atoms in
a molecule. The molecular geometry, or shape, of a molecule is an
important factor that affects the physical and chemical properties of a
compound. Those properties include melting and boiling points,
solubility, density, and the types of chemical reactions that a compound
undergoes. In this lesson, you will learn a technique to predict
molecular geometry based on a molecule’s Lewis electron dot structure.

## VSEPR Theory {#9.html#x-ck12-VlNFUFIgVGhlb3J5_1-vdo}

The **valence shell** is the outermost occupied shell of electrons in an
atom. This shell holds the valence electrons, which are the electrons
that are involved in bonding and shown in a Lewis structure.
**Valence-shell electron pair repulsion theory** , or VSEPR theory,
states that a molecule will adjust its shape so that the valence
electron pairs stay as far apart from each other as possible. This makes
sense, based on the fact that negatively charged electrons repel one
another. We will systematically classify molecules according to the
number of bonding pairs of electrons and the number of nonbonding or
lone pairs around the central atom. For the purposes of the VSEPR model,
a double or triple bond is no different in terms of repulsion than a
single bond. We will begin by examining molecules in which the central
atom does not have any lone pairs.

## Central Atom with No Lone Pairs {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2VudHJhbCBBdG9tIHdpdGggTm8gTG9uZSBQYWlycw.._1-ogt}

In order to easily understand the types of molecules possible, we will
use a simple system to identify the parts of any molecule.

<dl id="x-ck12-MTJmYTZiZmZmZmI2Yzg5NGExMDdkMzg3MGM5ZjAwOGQ.-fgy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YmY4ZjNhZjYwZjM4YjI3YWRmYzkyOTRlYTIzNGY2ZDc.-0jb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YmY4ZjNhZjYwZjM4YjI3YWRmYzkyOTRlYTIzNGY2ZDc.-ywy">
<dd>
A = central atom in a molecule

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YzVlZDliMTQ4NzI2N2ZkZjRiZjE0MDZiMDQwODdjNDg.-hue">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YzVlZDliMTQ4NzI2N2ZkZjRiZjE0MDZiMDQwODdjNDg.-mr8">
<dd>
B = atoms surrounding the central atom

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Subscripts after the B will denote the number of B atoms that are bonded
to the central A atom. For example, AB ~4~ is a molecule with a central
atom surrounded by four covalently bonded atoms. Again, it does not
matter if those bonds are single, double, or triple bonds.

### AB ~2~ {#9.html#x-ck12-QUI._1_1_1_1_1-zqk}

Beryllium hydride (BeH ~2~ ) consists of a central beryllium atom with
two single bonds to hydrogen atoms. Note that it violates the octet
rule, because the central atom has only 4 valence electrons. This is
acceptable because beryllium only has two valence electrons to begin
with, so it is not possible for it to create more than two covalent
bonds with hydrogen atoms.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222088750.png) </span>

According to the requirement that electron pairs maximize their distance
from one another, the two bonding pairs in the BeH ~2~ molecules will
arrange themselves on directly opposite sides of the central Be atom.
The resulting geometry is a *linear* molecule, shown in a “ball and
stick” model in **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktMTAtQmVIMi1CYWxsLVN0aWNr) :

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-Mzk2ODUzZjJmNDdjMzExNjllNDgwOTQ4ZGNjZTJmZTg.-ohb"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beryllium-hydride-molecule-IR-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222223309.png)

**Figure 9.3**

</div>

The H-Be-H bond angle is 180° because of its linear geometry.

Carbon dioxide is another example of a molecule which falls under the AB
~2~ category. Its Lewis structure consists of double bonds between the
central carbon atom and each oxygen atom.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222331926.png) </span>

The repulsion between the two double bonds on either side of the carbon
atom is no different than the repulsion between the two single bonds on
either side of the beryllium in the previous example. Therefore carbon
dioxide is also linear, as this achieves the maximum distance between
the electron pair bonds.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-M2IwNTk4ZWIzNzdlNTQ1ZDI0YzY4OTBmYjZiODQxOTY.-7sw"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Benji9072/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carbon_dioxide_structure.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222491808.png)

**Figure 9.4**

</div>

### AB ~3~ {#9.html#x-ck12-QUI._1_1_1_1_1-amx}

Boron trifluoride (BF ~3~ ) consists of a central boron atom with three
single bonds to fluorine atoms. The boron atom is an exception to the
octet rule, and generally only needs 6 atoms to be stable in a bonded
molecule.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222606217.png) </span>

The geometry of the BF ~3~ molecule is called *trigonal planar* . The
fluorine atoms are positioned at the vertices of an equilateral
triangle. The F-B-F angle is 120°, and all four atoms lie in the same
plane.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-OGQwMjRiY2QwZjg4ZTJlZTg5ODMyYjNmMzgwOGFkZDQ.-fyo"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boron-trifluoride-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222727643.png)

**Figure 9.5**

</div>

### AB ~4~ {#9.html#x-ck12-QUI._1_1_1_1_1-spl}

Methane (CH ~4~ ) is an organic compound that is the primary component
of natural gas. Its structure consists of a central carbon atom with
four single bonds to hydrogen atoms.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235222847204.png) </span>

In order to maximize their distance from one another, the four groups of
bonding electrons do not lie in the same plane. Instead, each of the
hydrogen atoms lies at the corners of a geometrical shape called a
tetrahedron. The carbon atom is at the center of the tetrahedron. Each
face of a tetrahedron is an equilateral triangle.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NGU5NGQwZGRkMDA1YjE3ZGIwOThjMjcyYzYxYWU5YTY.-diq"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(''left'') Pearson Scott Foresman; (''right'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="(''Left'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tetrahedron_(PSF).png; (''Right'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methane-CRC-MW-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223189853.png)

**Figure 9.6**

( *left* ) Tetrahedron. ( *right* ) Ball and stick model of methane.

</div>

The molecular geometry of the methane molecule is referred to as
*tetrahedral* . The H-C-H bond angles are 109.5°, which is larger than
the 90° that they would be if the molecule was planar. This way, the
bonds are as far apart as possible to minimize electron repulsion. When
drawing a structural formula for a molecule such as methane, it is
advantageous to be able to indicate the three-dimensional character of
its shape. The structural formula in the **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktMjctTWV0aGFuZS1QZXJzcGVjdGl2ZQ..) is
called a *perspective drawing* . The dotted line bond should be
visualized as going back into the page, while the solid triangle bond
should be visualized as coming out of the page.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-N2I1MWJmYTZkMjUwYmYzNTI4OTZmYWNjZTE4M2FhYzk.-gk7"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methane-2D-stereo.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223361136.png)

**Figure 9.7**

</div>

### AB ~5~ {#9.html#x-ck12-QUI._1_1_1_1_1-ilm}

The central phosphorus atom in a molecule of phosphorus pentachloride
(PCl ~5~ ) has ten electrons surrounding it, exceeding the octet rule.
This is allowed because phosphorus is a third period element and has
access to d orbitals, which will be discussed later on.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223466760.png) </span>

Unlike the other basic shapes, the five chlorine atoms in this
arrangement are not equivalent with respect to their geometric
relationship to the phosphorus atom. Three of the chlorine atoms lie in
a plane, with Cl-P-Cl bond angles of 120°. This portion of the molecule
is essentially the same as a trigonal planar arrangement. These chlorine
atoms are referred to as the *equatorial* atoms because they are
arranged around the center of the molecule. The other two chlorine atoms
are oriented exactly perpendicular to the plane formed by the phosphorus
atom and the equatorial chlorine atoms. These are called the *axial*
chlorine atoms.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NzEzMjgyZjdiNmE4Nzc1MjU1NTcwOWVkNGUxZTVjYjA.-ocr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(''left'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons); (''right'') Perditax" -->
<!-- @@url="(''left'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phosphorus-pentachloride-3D-balls.png; (''right'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Trigonal_bipyramid.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223559279.png)

**Figure 9.8**

( *left* ) Trigonal bipyramidal. ( *right* ) Ball and stick model of
phosphorus pentachloride.

</div>

In the **Figure**
[above](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktMTUtVHJpZ29uYWwtQmlweXJpbWlkYWwtUENsNQ..)
, the axial chlorine atoms form a vertical axis with the central
phosphorus atom. There is a 90° angle between P-Cl ~axial~ bonds and
P-Cl ~equitorial~ bonds. The molecular geometry of PCl ~5~ is called
*trigonal bipyramidal* . A surface covering the molecule would take the
shape of two three-sided pyramids pointing in opposite directions.

### AB ~6~ {#9.html#x-ck12-QUI._1_1_1_1_1-jr8}

The sulfur atom in sulfur hexafluoride (SF ~6~ ) also exceeds the octet
rule.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223666242.png) </span>

Unlike the trigonal bipyramidal structure, all of the fluorine atoms in
SF ~6~ are equivalent. The molecular geometry is called *octahedral* ,
because a surface covering the molecule would have eight sides. All of
the F-S-F angles are 90° in an octahedral molecule, with the exception
of the fluorine atoms that are directly opposite one another which have
a 180° bond angle.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NGY3MjEzN2UzOTZlNWEzNmNmYTI2Y2Y3NWM0NDI4NDE.-wvl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="3D molecule: Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons); Octahedron: Jodi So" -->
<!-- @@url="3D molecule: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur-hexafluoride-3D-balls.png; Octahedron: CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="3D molecule: Public Domain; Octahedron: CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223835515.png)

**Figure 9.9**

</div>

## Central Atom with One or More Lone Pairs {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2VudHJhbCBBdG9tIHdpdGggT25lIG9yIE1vcmUgTG9uZSBQYWlycw.._1-i6n}

The molecular geometries of molecules change when the central atom has
one or more lone pairs of electrons. The number bonds to the central
atom plus the number of lone pairs on the central atom gives us what is
called the **electron domain geometry** . Electron domain geometries
refer to the five molecular shapes learned so far: linear, trigonal
planar, tetrahedral, trigonal bipyramidal, or octahedral. However, if
one or more of the bonding pairs of electrons is replaced with a lone
pair, the shape of the molecules is altered. This can apply to any of
the geometries discussed above, but for now we will focus on the
tetrahedral electron domain geometry.

### Ammonia {#9.html#x-ck12-QW1tb25pYQ.._1-wsh}

The ammonia molecule contains three single bonds and one lone pair on
the central nitrogen atom.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223939895.png) </span>

The domain geometry for a molecule with four electron pairs is
tetrahedral, as was seen with CH ~4~ . In the ammonia molecule, one of
the electron pairs is a lone pair rather than a bonding pair. The
molecular geometry of NH ~3~ is called *trigonal pyramidal* .

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NThhNTEwMmVjYjZlM2NmYmQ1OGNmOWNmNGI1MTMzNTc.-uq9"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(''left'') User:Booyabazooka/Wikimedia Commons; (''right'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="(''left'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia_lone_electron_pair.svg; (''right'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia-3D-balls-A.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235223999746.png)

**Figure 9.10**

Ammonia, NH ~3~ .

</div>

Recall that the bond angles in the tetrahedral CH ~4~ molecule are all
equal to 109.5°. One might expect the H-N-H bond angles in ammonia to be
109.5° as well, but slight adjustments need to be made for the presence
of lone pairs. Within the context of the VSEPR model, lone pairs of
electrons are considered to be slightly more repulsive than bonding
pairs of electrons, due to their closer proximity to the central atom.
In other words, lone pairs “take up more space”. Therefore the H-N-H
angle is slightly less than 109.5°. Its actual value is approximately
107°.

### Water {#9.html#x-ck12-V2F0ZXI._1-pvq}

A water molecule consists of two bonding pairs and two lone pairs.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224117300.png) </span>

The water molecule, like the ammonia and methane molecules, has a
tetrahedral domain geometry. In the water molecule, two of the electron
pairs are lone pairs rather than bonding pairs. The molecular geometry
of the water molecule is referred to as *bent* . The H-O-H bond angle is
104.5°, which is smaller than the bond angle in NH ~3~ .

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-MDY3NmMyZmNiMWJmM2YyYWMyZDliMGQxMmFmYjUwODk.-asx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="(''left'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Water-dimensions-from-Greenwood%26Earnshaw-2D.png; (''right'') http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Water-3D-balls-A.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224236786.png)

**Figure 9.11**

Water, H ~2~ O.

</div>

## Summary of VSEPR {#9.html#x-ck12-U3VtbWFyeSBvZiBWU0VQUg.._1-7tp}

The VSEPR model can be applied to predict the molecular geometry of a
given molecular compound. There are a number of additional shapes that
can be constructed starting from other electron domain geometries and
replacing one or more atoms with lone pairs. We will not go over each
individual case in this book, but the names for various shapes are
provided in the tables below as a reference. To determine the shape of a
given molecule, use the following steps:

-   Draw the Lewis electron dot structure for the molecule.
-   Count the total number of electron pairs around the central atom.
    This is referred to as the *electron domain geometry* .
-   If there are no lone pairs around the central atom, refer to
    **Table** [below](#9.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtOS4y) , to
    determine the molecular geometry, which is the same as the electron
    domain geometry.
-   If there are one or more lone pairs on the central atom, the
    molecular geometry (the actual shape of the molecule) will not be
    the same as the electron domain geometry. Refer to **Table**
    [below](#9.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtOS4z) .
-   In predicting bond angles, remember that a lone pair takes up more
    space than a bonding pair or pairs of electrons.

  Atoms Around Central Atom   Electron Domain Geometry   Molecular Geometry     Example
  --------------------------- -------------------------- ---------------------- ----------
  2                           linear                     linear                 BeCl ~2~
  3                           trigonal planar            trigonal planar        BF ~3~
  4                           tetrahedral                tetrahedral            CH ~4~
  5                           trigonal bipyramidal       trigonal bipyramidal   PCl ~5~
  6                           octahedral                 octahedral             SF ~6~

  :  Geometries of Molecules in Which the Central Atom Has No Lone Pairs

  Atoms Plus Lone Pairs Around Central Atom   Number of Surrounding Atoms   Number of Lone Pairs   Electron Domain Geometry   Molecular Geometry   Example
  ------------------------------------------- ----------------------------- ---------------------- -------------------------- -------------------- ---------
  3                                           2                             1                      trigonal planar            bent                 O ~3~
  4                                           3                             1                      tetrahedral                trigonal pyramidal   NH ~3~
  4                                           2                             2                      tetrahedral                bent                 H ~2~ O
  5                                           4                             1                      trigonal bipyramidal       seesaw               SF ~4~
  5                                           3                             2                      trigonal bipyramidal       T-shaped             ClF ~3~
  5                                           2                             3                      trigonal bipyramidal       linear               XeF ~2~
  6                                           5                             1                      octahedral                 square pyramidal     BrF ~5~
  6                                           4                             2                      octahedral                 square planar        XeF ~4~

  :  Geometries of Molecules in Which the Central Atom Has One or More
  Lone Pairs

Practice with basic molecule shapes at
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/molecule-shapes-basics](molecule-shapes-basics)
. Practice building molecules at
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/build-a-molecule](build-a-molecule)
. Build 3D molecules at
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/molecule-shapes](molecule-shapes)
.

## Lesson Summary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-2l8}

-   Valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory is a technique
    for predicting the molecular geometry of a molecule. A molecule's
    shape provides important information that can be used to understand
    its chemical and physical properties.
-   According to VSEPR, covalent bonds and lone pairs distribute
    themselves around a central atom in such a way as to maximize their
    distance from each other.
-   Electron domain geometries are based on the total number of bonds
    and lone pairs, while molecular geometries look only at the
    arrangements of atoms and bonding pairs.

## Lesson Review Questions {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-dcf}

1.  What is the basic principle of VSEPR theory?
2.  How many covalent bonds would there be attached to a central atom in
    the following configurations:
    1.  tetrahedral
    2.  octahedral
    3.  trigonal planar
    4.  linear

3.  What is the difference between the electron domain geometry and the
    molecular geometry?
4.  How do lone pairs act differently than bonding pairs in terms of
    electron repulsion?
5.  Using the VSEPR method, predict the molecular geometries (including
    bond angles) for each of the following molecules:
    1.  SF ~2~
    2.  PBr ~3~
    3.  AlCl ~3~
    4.  TeCl ~6~
    5.  HCN

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#9.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-ynx}

Video on VSEPR theory:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FhVkCH9COZo](watch?v=FhVkCH9COZo)

Possible shapes of molecules according to VSEPR theory:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3FCHVlSZc4](watch?v=i3FCHVlSZc4)

## Points to Consider {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-klg}

-   How might molecular geometry affect how molecules interact with one
    another?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686111] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686112] -->

# Polarity in Chemical Bonds {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9sYXJpdHkgaW4gQ2hlbWljYWwgQm9uZHM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-bl2}

-   Understand the concept of polarity.
-   Define electronegativity.
-   Determine the polarity of a chemical bond using the
    electronegativity chart.
-   Distinguish between nonpolar covalent, polar covalent, and ionic
    bonds in terms of electron sharing.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-hoa}

-   **polarity** : A property of molecules in which one or more atoms
    possess either a partial positive or a partial negative charge.
-   **electronegativity** : The ability to attract shared electrons.
-   **nonpolar covalent bond** : Exists only between two
    identical atoms.
-   **polar covalent bond** : Exists when the electrons are still shared
    (the bond is covalent), but the bond is significantly polarized.

## Check Your Understanding {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-pbw}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#9.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._2-vpu}

-   What are covalent bonds?

## Introduction {#9.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-pnk}

We have learned that covalently bonded molecules share valence electrons
in order for atoms to fill their valence shells. However, sometimes one
of the atoms has a greater attraction for electrons than another,
resulting in an unequal sharing of electrons. This results in molecular
**polarity** .

## Electronegativity {#9.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb25lZ2F0aXZpdHk._2-u81}

When two atoms of different elements come together to form a bond, the
atoms generally do not attract the shared electrons with the same amount
of pull. The ability to attract shared electrons is a property known as
**electronegativity** . The higher the electronegativity value, the more
pull is exerted by that element. Electronegativity values for various
elements are found in **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMDktMDMtcGVyaW9kaWN0YWJsZQ..) .

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NmI0YzI1MGMwOWM5ZDA1ZmVhZTg3ZTNkMDk3YjQ0OTM.-ose"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Joanjoc/Ca.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Taula_peri%C3%B2dica_electronegativitat.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224390939.png)

**Figure 9.12**

Electronegativities of the elements.

</div>

The general trend in electronegativity is that the value increases from
left to right across a row in the periodic table and decreases down a
column. The most electronegative element is fluorine, which has a value
of 4.0. As discussed in the lesson "Trends in the Periodic Table,"
electronegativity increases across a row as the number of protons in the
nucleus increases and therefore has a stronger pull. Electronegativity
decreases down a column due to an increased effect of electron shielding
in larger atoms.

## Polar Bonds {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9sYXIgQm9uZHM._2-i2x}

If there is a difference between the electronegativity values of the two
atoms involved in a covalent bond, the bond is said to be polar. In this
situation, the more electronegative atom has a stronger tendency to
attract the shared electrons toward itself. For example, in the water
molecule, oxygen has an electronegativity value of 3.5, while hydrogen
has a value of 2.1. Since O has a higher electronegativity value, the
electrons in each covalent bond will be pulled closer to the oxygen
atom. Because the negatively charged electrons are spending more time
near the oxygen atom and less time near the hydrogen atoms, each atom
appears to have a partial electric charge when averaged over time. The
Greek letter δ (delta) is used to designate a partial charge. As we see
in the illustration, oxygen has a partial negative charge, and the
hydrogens each have a partial positive change. These charges are
fractional charges, less than the full +1 or -1 charge that we might see
for a sodium or chloride ion.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-YzcyZGNjMDFmNmM1M2EyNGY5MzYwZTkzYzg4YWRmNWY.-6fz"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Sansculotte/De.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wasser.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224531696.png)

**Figure 9.13**

Partial charges in the water molecule.

</div>

A similar situation occurs in the hydrogen fluoride molecule. The
difference in electronegativity between fluorine (4.0) and hydrogen
(2.1) is quite high, so the shared electrons spend much more time in the
vicinity of the fluorine atom. As a result, fluorine carries a partial
negative charge in this molecule, whereas hydrogen carries a partial
positive charge.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-YzNlYTg5MDk3YTUxMGFiMTQwODc0OGU2YjViNjVhMTk.-7l4"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogen-fluoride-elpot-transparent-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224640988.png)

**Figure 9.14**

The hydrogen fluoride molecule. The blue region represents an area of
partial positive charge, the white area is electrically neutral, and the
pink area is a zone of partial negative charge.

</div>

## Classifying Chemical Bonds {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2xhc3NpZnlpbmcgQ2hlbWljYWwgQm9uZHM._2-mb2}

How do we know if a specific pair of electrons will form a covalent bond
or an ionic one? Electronegativity data turns out to be a fairly useful
tool to make these predictions. Although there is no clear line between
a polar covalent bond and an ionic one, we can define some general
guidelines:

1.  Pure **nonpolar covalent bonds** exist only between two
    identical atoms. The H-H bond would be 100% covalent, because there
    is no difference in electronegativity between the two atoms.
2.  If the electronegativity difference between the two atoms is 0.4 or
    less, the polarity of the bond is very minimal, and neither atom
    takes on a significant partial charge. For example, the C-H bond (an
    electronegativity difference of 0.4) is essentially non-polar.
3.  When the difference in electronegativity is between 0.5-1.6, the
    electrons are still shared (the bond is covalent), but it is
    significantly polarized. We refer to these as **polar covalent
    bonds** .
4.  Ionic bonds tend to form between atoms for which the
    electronegativity differences are 2.0 and above. In general, ionic
    bonds between two atoms require one metal and one nonmetal.

## Lesson Summary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-uyn}

-   Electronegativity is the tendency of an atom to draw shared
    electrons towards itself.
-   Polar bonds contain atoms that possess either a partial positive or
    a partial negative charge.
-   Electronegativity differences can be used to predict the extent to
    which a particular chemical bond is polarized.

## Lesson Review Questions {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-y72}

1.  What causes molecular polarity?
2.  Define electronegativity.
3.  Explain how electronegativity changes across a period and down a
    group of the periodic table.
4.  Define and give an example of a polar bond.
5.  Which is the most electronegative atom in the periodic table?
6.  Calculate the electronegativity difference for each of the following
    bonds:
    1.  C-N
    2.  C-F
    3.  C-O
    4.  H-I

7.  Would you expect the bond in each of the following cases to be ionic
    or polar? Explain your reasoning.
    1.  Mg-O
    2.  H-I
    3.  Li-F
    4.  C-N

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#9.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-va3}

-   Electronegativity video:
    [http://www.brightstorm.com/science/chemistry/the-periodic-table/electronegativity/\#](#)

<!-- -->

-   Molecular polarity video:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0-zVXdeX7f4](watch?v=0-zVXdeX7f4)

## Points to Consider {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-sy1}

-   How does the polarity of a molecule affect how that molecule
    interacts with other molecules?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686112] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686113] -->

# Intermolecular Forces {#9.html#x-ck12-SW50ZXJtb2xlY3VsYXIgRm9yY2Vz}

## Lesson Objectives {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._3-pvg}

-   Define and give examples of intermolecular forces.
-   Explain what it means for a molecule to be polar.
-   Describe various types of intermolecular interactions, including
    ion-ion, ion-dipole, dipole-dipole, and dispersion forces.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._3-2hm}

-   **dipole** : Occurs when two opposite charges are separated by
    some distance.
-   **molecular dipole** : The overall dipole in a molecule, or the
    geometric sum of all the individual bond dipoles in a molecule.
-   **dipole-dipole force** : The force of two polar molecules
    interacting with one another.
-   **dispersion force** : An attractive force that arises as a result
    of temporary dipoles induced in atoms or molecules.
-   **hydrogen bond** : A bond that only occurs in molecules where
    hydrogen is covalently bonded to one of three elements: fluorine,
    oxygen, or nitrogen.

## Check Your Understanding {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_3-lka}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#9.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._3-sjm}

-   What is electronegativity?
-   How does electronegativity influence the charge distribution within
    a molecule?

## Introduction {#9.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_3-h6x}

In some ways, a collection of gas molecules represents the simplest form
of matter. Because the individual molecules are so far apart, they have
only fleeting interactions with one another. In contrast, molecules that
have clustered together to form a liquid or solid are constantly
exerting forces on each other. In fact, it is only because of these
attractive forces that molecular solids and liquids exist at all. In
this lesson, we will look at some of the ways in which molecules and
ions attract one another to form solids and liquids.

## Ion-Ion Interactions {#9.html#x-ck12-SW9uLUlvbiBJbnRlcmFjdGlvbnM._3-rjg}

Ion-ion interactions have already been considered in a previous chapter,
so we will simply do a short review. These interactions are most
significant in the solid state. When dissolved in water, ions are
shielded from one another by water molecules, making ion-ion
interactions less prevalent.

In the solid state, ions interact by forming lattices in which
oppositely charged ions arrange themselves in a regular fashion. In the
**Figure** [below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fOV8xOF9sYXR0aWNl) , the small
purple Na ions interlock with the larger green chlorine ions in a
pattern defined by the relative sizes and charges of the two ions.
Because each ion has a full positive or negative charge, the forces
holding two ions together are relatively strong.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-YmM4M2ViNWM4MTZiMDI5NmYzMzI0MTlhOGQ4MWI2NWE.-mcv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lattice-enthalpy-NaCl-3D-ionic.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224742149.png)

**Figure 9.15**

Ion-ion interaction to form a lattice.

</div>

More complex polyatomic ions can also participate in these types of
interactions. Sodium acetate ( **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fOV8xOV9Tb2RpdW1fYWNldGF0ZQ..) ) is one
such material.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NTc5OWUwNzIzYzY5NDhmZjNhZDI4ZWZjZDA2MWVkNjE.-8hb"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-acetate-2D-skeletal.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224839853.png)

**Figure 9.16**

Sodium acetate

</div>

## Dipole-Dipole Interactions {#9.html#x-ck12-RGlwb2xlLURpcG9sZSBJbnRlcmFjdGlvbnM._3-odt}

A **dipole** occurs when two opposite charges are separated by some
amount of distance. We have already seen dipoles in the form of polar
bonds. For example, each O-H bond in water is an example of a dipole;
the partial positive charge on hydrogen is separated from the partial
negative charge on oxygen by the length of the bond. A **molecular
dipole** is the geometric sum of all the individual bond dipoles in a
molecule. In order for a molecule to have a dipole, it must have at
least one polar bond. However, not all molecules with polar bonds have
an overall molecular dipole. Sometimes the dipoles within a molecule
will effectively cancel each other out, giving a zero net molecular
dipole. This is often seen in symmetrical molecules.

A **dipole-dipole force** can be seen when two polar molecules interact
with one another. The partial positive region of one molecule will be
attracted to the partial negative region of an adjacent one. Because
both charges are partial (less than a full charge), these interactions
are weaker than those involving ions. An example of a dipole-dipole
interaction between two molecules of HCl is shown in the **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fOV8yMl9kaXBvbGVfZGlwb2xl) .

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-Yjg4ZDJhNDYyMThhNDViM2U1OGEwYTVhMDlkMzUwZWM.-nol"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dipole-dipole-interaction-in-HCl-2D.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235224931180.png)

**Figure 9.17**

Dipole-dipole interactions

</div>

## Ion-Dipole Interactions {#9.html#x-ck12-SW9uLURpcG9sZSBJbnRlcmFjdGlvbnM._3-cij}

An ion-dipole interaction involves the attraction between a fully
charged entity and a polar molecule. Both cations and anions can
participate in this type of bonding. A cation will be attracted to the
partial negative portion of the polar molecule, while an anion will
interact with the partial positive region.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-MTBlYTI0MjhkOTVkZjMzMmYxZmZiN2E5ZTBkMDIyZDA.-7al"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225080282.png)

**Figure 9.18**

Polar molecules.

</div>

The interaction of sodium and chloride ions with water is one example of
an ion-dipole interaction:

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-YzNkYTgwNTZmMGE5NjgxYzI0Yjg0MjYxNDc1N2JjYzI.-t6n"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung and Jodi So" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225247963.png)

**Figure 9.19**

Interactions of ions with polar water molecules.

</div>

The positive sodium ions are attracted to the partial negative portion
of the water molecule (the red oxygen atoms), while the negative
chloride ions interact with the partial positive hydrogen portion (the
blue atoms). Because one of the bonding partners has only a partial
positive or negative charge, these forces are somewhat weaker than
ion-ion interactions.

## Dispersion Forces {#9.html#x-ck12-RGlzcGVyc2lvbiBGb3JjZXM._3-fek}

Somewhat more challenging to visualize are **dispersion forces** . These
interactions are defined as attractive forces that arise as a result of
temporary dipoles induced in atoms or molecules. They are often referred
to as London dispersion forces due to the work done by the
German-American physicist Fritz London (1900-1954).

Two things need to be kept in mind with regard to these forces: they are
relatively weak, and they do not require any permanent polarity. Induced
dipoles are caused by local and temporary changes in the environment
immediately around a molecule. Brief distortions in the electron cloud
cause temporary dipoles to come and go, and these provide a way for even
completely nonpolar molecules to attract one another. Although these may
seem almost insignificant compared to the stronger forces discussed
above, nonpolar substances would have no way to form solids or liquids
without them. Note that all molecular substances experience dispersion
forces, but for small polar molecules, dipole-dipole interactions will
be the dominant attractive force.

## The Hydrogen Bond {#9.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEh5ZHJvZ2VuIEJvbmQ._3-v4j}

A “special case” of dipole-dipole interactions is referred to as the
**hydrogen bond** . Hydrogen bonding occurs only in molecules where
hydrogen is covalently bonded to one of three elements: fluorine,
oxygen, or nitrogen. These three elements are so electronegative that
they withdraw the majority of the electron density from the covalent
bond with hydrogen, leaving the H atom very electron-deficient. Because
the hydrogen atom does not have any electrons other than the ones in the
covalent bond, its positively charged nucleus is almost completely
exposed, allowing strong attractions to other nearby lone pairs. These
lone pairs are generally on atoms with partial negative charges in
adjacent molecules, although hydrogen bonds within a single molecule can
also occur if the structure of the molecule is appropriate.

A particularly important example of hydrogen bonding occurs between
water molecules. Because water has two O-H bonds and two lone pairs on
each oxygen atom, extensive networks of hydrogen bonds can form,
allowing ice and liquid water to exist.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-ODk5NmRjYjU2MzA4OTFjMTZmY2UxYWZlODgyZTcxNTk.-iv3"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogen-bonding-in-water-2D.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225360755.png)

**Figure 9.20**

</div>

Quite often, the partial charges are not explicitly written when drawing
hydrogen bonds, but they are always there. Illustrated in the **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fOV8yNF9kb25vcl9hY2NlcHRvcg..) are a few
more examples of hydrogen bonding in molecules.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NGNjMmExNTY1NDFmZTY0NjAwYTc0ZDQxNWY2MzgyYzQ.-fwh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Mcpazzo/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:WikipediaHDonorAcceptor.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225579642.png)

**Figure 9.21**

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._3-kw9}

-   A variety of interactions can occur between molecules that involve
    attractions between full or partial charges.
-   Molecules that have a partial positive region and a partial negative
    region are said to possess a molecular dipole. The interactions
    between these dipoles are what allow molecules to condense into the
    liquid or solid states.
-   Even completely nonpolar molecules can attract each other due to
    dispersion forces.
-   The hydrogen bond is a special type of dipole-dipole interaction
    that is seen in a variety of molecular compounds.

## Lesson Review Questions {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._3-sma}

1.  Explain what gives a molecule a molecular dipole.
2.  What is a dipole-dipole interaction?
3.  Define the term hydrogen bond.
4.  Explain what dispersion forces are.
5.  What would be the strongest intermolecular force holding together
    collections of each of the following molecules?
    1.  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~
    2.  CH ~3~ OH
    3.  PCl ~5~
    4.  O ~2~

6.  Draw the hydrogen-bond interactions that can occur between molecules
    of CH ~3~ NH ~2~ .
7.  How would molecules containing N-F bonds interact with one another?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#9.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_3-x2n}

-   Video discussing intermolecular forces:
    [http://meaghersclasses.podomatic.com/entry/2007-02-24T21\_30\_52-08\_00](2007-02-24T21_30_52-08_00)
-   Video discussing van der Waal’s forces:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qfzpJvsp04](watch?v=8qfzpJvsp04)
-   Tutorial on intermolecular forces:
    [http://www.ausetute.com.au/intermof.html](intermof.html)

## Points to Consider {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_3-svz}

We have looked very briefly at where electrons are in covalent bonds.

-   How does the location of the electron in a bond influence the
    three-dimensional geometry of that molecule?
-   What modifications do we have to make to our understanding of
    orbitals in order to explain some details of covalent bonding?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686113] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686114] -->

# Hybridization and Molecular Orbitals {#9.html#x-ck12-SHlicmlkaXphdGlvbiBhbmQgTW9sZWN1bGFyIE9yYml0YWxz}

## Lesson Objectives {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._4-d0t}

-   Describe valence bond theory as it pertains to the formation of a
    covalent bond between atoms.
-   Describe the process of electron promotion and hybridization during
    the formation of hybrid orbitals.
-   Explain the relationship between electron domain geometry and the
    various types of hybrid orbitals.
-   Distinguish between sigma and pi bonding.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._4-tbg}

-   **valence bond theory** : States that covalent bonds are formed by
    the overlap of partially filled atomic orbitals.
-   **hybridization** : The mixing of the atomic orbitals in an atom to
    produce a set of hybrid orbitals.
-   **hybrid orbitals** : The atomic orbitals obtained when two or more
    nonequivalent orbitals from the same atom combine in preparation for
    bond formation.
-   **sigma bond (σ)** : A bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in an
    end-to-end fashion, with the electron density concentrated between
    the nuclei of the bonding atoms.
-   **pi bond (π)** : A bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in a
    side-by-side fashion, with the electron density concentrated above
    and below the plane of the nuclei of the bonding atoms.
-   **molecular orbitals** : Orbitals created as a result of atomic
    orbitals combining to make covalent bonds

## Check Your Understanding {#9.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_4-ep9}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#9.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._4-hpz}

-   How are electrons arranged in atomic orbitals?
-   What is the difference between the electron domain geometry of a
    molecule and its molecular geometry?

Earlier in this chapter, you learned how to draw Lewis electron-dot
structures for molecules and predict their shapes using VSEPR theory. In
this lesson, we will see how these concepts relate to the way in which
electrons behave in their atomic orbitals when a covalent bond forms.

## Introduction {#9.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_4-mve}

Atoms form covalent bonds by sharing valence electrons. The valence
electrons are located in atomic orbitals. However, when a bond forms,
the structure of the atomic orbitals changes. In this lesson, we will
see how the atomic orbitals interact to share valence electrons and form
different types of covalent bonds.

## Valence Bond Theory {#9.html#x-ck12-VmFsZW5jZSBCb25kIFRoZW9yeQ.._4-v6u}

Covalent bonds form when the electron clouds of two atoms overlap with
each other. In a simple H ~2~ molecule, the single electron in each atom
becomes attracted to the nucleus of the other atom in the molecule as
the atoms come closer together. Other covalent bonds form in the same
way as unpaired electrons from two atoms “match up” to form the bond. In
a fluorine atom, there is an unpaired electron in one of the 2p
orbitals. When a F ~2~ molecule forms, the 2p orbitals from each of the
two atoms overlap to produce the F−F covalent bond. The overlapping
orbitals do not have to be of the same type to form a covalent bond. For
example, in a molecule of HF, the 1s orbital of the hydrogen atom
overlaps with the 2p orbital of the fluorine atom ( **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktMzgtSEY.) ):

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-ODk0MWI1MGVhMzMyNjRiMTM2MjE4NWNkZTUyYTEzNDc.-lec"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225684236.png)

**Figure 9.22**

In a molecule of hydrogen fluoride (HF), the covalent bond occurs due to
an overlap between the 1s orbital of the hydrogen atom and the 2p
orbital of the fluorine atom.

</div>

In essence, any covalent bond results from a combination of atomic
orbitals. This idea forms the basis for a quantum mechanical theory
called valence bond (VB) theory. **Valence bond theory** states that
covalent bonds are formed by the overlap of partially filled atomic
orbitals.

## Hybrid Orbitals {#9.html#x-ck12-SHlicmlkIE9yYml0YWxz_4-j49}

The bonding scheme described by valence bond theory must account for
molecular geometries as predicted by VSEPR theory. To do that, we must
introduce a concept called hybrid orbitals.

### sp ^3^ Hybridization {#9.html#x-ck12-c3A._4_4-xpl}

Unfortunately, overlap of existing atomic orbitals (s, p, etc.) is not
sufficient to explain some of the bonding and molecular geometries that
are observed. Consider the carbon atom in the methane (CH ~4~ )
molecule. An isolated carbon atom has an electron configuration of 1s
^2^ 2s ^2^ 2p ^2^ , meaning that it has two unpaired electrons in its 2p
orbitals, as shown below.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225805539.png) </span>

According to the description of valence bond theory so far, carbon would
be expected to form only two bonds, corresponding to its two unpaired
electrons. However, methane is a common and stable molecule that
contains four equivalent C−H bonds. One way to account for this might be
to promote one of the 2s electrons to the empty 2p orbital.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235225930567.png) </span>

Now, four bonds are possible. The promotion of the electron “costs” a
small amount of energy, but recall that the process of bond formation is
accompanied by a decrease in energy. The two extra bonds that can now be
formed result in a lower overall energy, and thus a greater stability,
for the CH ~4~ molecule. Carbon normally forms four bonds in most of its
compounds.

The number of bonds is now correct, but the geometry is wrong. The three
p orbitals (p ~x~ , p ~y~ , p ~z~ ) are oriented at 90° angles relative
to one another. However, as we saw in our discussion of VSEPR theory,
the observed H−C−H bond angle in the tetrahedral CH ~4~ molecule is
actually 109.5°. Therefore, the methane molecule cannot be adequately
represented by simple overlap of the 2s and 2p orbitals of carbon with
the 1s orbitals of each hydrogen atom.

To explain the bonding in methane, it is necessary to introduce the
concept of hybridization and hybrid atomic orbitals. **Hybridization**
is the mixing of the atomic orbitals in an atom to produce a set of
hybrid orbitals. When hybridization occurs, it must do so as a result of
the mixing of nonequivalent orbitals. For example, s and p orbitals can
hybridize, but p orbitals cannot hybridize only with other p orbitals.
**Hybrid orbitals** are the atomic orbitals obtained when two or more
nonequivalent orbitals from the same atom combine in preparation for
bond formation. In the current case of carbon, the single 2s orbital
hybridizes with the three 2p orbitals to form a set of four hybrid
orbitals, called sp ^3^ hybrids.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226051043.png) </span>

The sp ^3^ hybrids are all equivalent to one another. Spatially, the
hybrid orbitals point towards the four corners of a tetrahedron (
**Figure** [below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktMzktVGV0cmFoZWRyb24.) ):

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-MWEwNTIwMmM2MGZjZTRlMWE2YjI5ZGRmNTg5NGViNzQ.-lqy"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226175866.png)

**Figure 9.23**

The process of sp ^3^ hybridization is the mixing of an s orbital with a
set of three p orbitals to form a set of four sp ^3^ hybrid orbitals.
Each large lobe of the hybrid orbitals points to one corner of a
tetrahedron.

</div>

The large lobe from each of the sp ^3^ hybrid orbitals then overlaps
with normal unhybridized 1s orbitals on each hydrogen atom to form the
tetrahedral methane molecule.

Another example of sp ^3^ hybridization occurs in the ammonia (NH ~3~ )
molecule. The electron domain geometry of ammonia is also tetrahedral,
meaning that there are four groups of electrons around the central
nitrogen atom. Unlike methane, however, one of those electron groups is
a lone pair. The resulting molecular geometry is trigonal pyramidal.
Just as in the carbon atom, the hybridization process starts as a
promotion of a 2s electron to a 2p orbital, followed by hybridization to
form a set of four sp ^3^ hybrids. In this case, one of the hybrid
orbitals already contains a pair of electrons, leaving only three
half-filled orbitals available to form covalent bonds with three
hydrogen atoms.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-ZjBlMDFmYmY3NzJlODA3MzFkZDIyZDY0ODk5OTdmNTg.-3ni"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226418946.png)

**Figure 9.24**

The trigonal pyramidal ammonia molecule also results from sp ^3^
hybridization of the central (nitrogen) atom. Of the four groups of
electrons surrounding the nitrogen atom, three form single covalent
bonds to hydrogen atoms, while one group is a lone pair.

</div>

The methane and ammonia examples illustrate the connection between
orbital hybridization and the VSEPR model. The electron domain geometry
predicted by VSEPR leads directly to the type of hybrid orbitals that
must be formed to accommodate that geometry. Both methane and ammonia
have tetrahedral electron domain geometries and thus both undergo sp ^3^
hybridization.

Likewise, the bent-shaped water molecule (H ~2~ O) also involves the
formation of sp ^3^ hybrids on the oxygen atom. In this case, however,
there are two hybrid orbitals which have lone pairs and two which bond
to the hydrogen atoms. Because the electron domain geometry for H ~2~ O
is tetrahedral, the hybridization is sp ^3^ .

### sp ^2^ Hybridization {#9.html#x-ck12-c3A._4_4-ec2}

Boron trifluoride (BF ~3~ ) is predicted to have a trigonal planar
geometry by VSEPR. First, a paired 2s electron is promoted to an empty
2p orbital.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226542494.png) </span>

This is followed by hybridization of the three occupied orbitals to form
a set of three sp ^2^ hybrids, leaving the 2p ~z~ orbital unhybridized.
The choice of which p orbital to leave unhybridized is arbitrary, but 2p
~z~ is conventionally chosen in the case of sp ^2^ hybrids.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226659161.png) </span>

The geometry of the *sp ^2^* hybrid orbitals is trigonal planar, with
the large lobe of each orbital pointing towards one corner of an
equilateral triangle ( **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktNDEtVHJpZ29uYWwtUGxhbmFy) ). The
angle between any two of the hybrid orbital lobes is 120°. Each can bond
with a 2 *p* orbital from a fluorine atom to form the trigonal planar BF
~3~ molecule.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NzAyZjcyZDdiYWZkMTY5M2Y1OWZlMWIxMzQxYTZjMTM.-hkk"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So, using 3D molecule by Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation; 3D molecule: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boron-trifluoride-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D molecule available under public domain)" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226765764.png)

**Figure 9.25**

The process of sp ^2^ hybridization involves the mixing of one s orbital
with a set of two p orbitals (p ~x~ and p ~y~ ) to form a set of three
sp ~2~ hybrid orbitals. Each large lobe of the hybrid orbitals points to
one corner of a triangle.

</div>

Other molecules with a trigonal planar electron domain geometry also
form sp ^2^ hybrid orbitals. For example, the electron domain geometry
of ozone (O ~3~ ) is trigonal planar, although the presence of a lone
pair on the central oxygen atom makes the molecular geometry bent. The
hybridization of the central O atom of ozone is sp ^2^ .

### sp Hybridization {#9.html#x-ck12-c3AgSHlicmlkaXphdGlvbg.._4-0ta}

A beryllium hydride (BeH ~2~ ) molecule is predicted to be linear by
VSEPR. The beryllium atom contains only paired electrons, so it must
also undergo hybridization. One of the 2s electrons is first promoted to
an empty 2p orbital.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235226896109.png) </span>

The occupied orbitals are then hybridized, and the result is a pair of
sp hybrid orbitals. The two remaining p orbitals (arbitrarily chosen to
be p ~y~ and p ~z~ ) do not hybridize and remain unoccupied.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227020096.png) </span>

The geometry of the sp hybrid orbitals is linear, with the large lobes
of the two orbitals pointing in opposite directions along one axis,
arbitrarily defined as the x-axis ( **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktNzQtTGluZWFy) ). Each can bond with a
1s orbital from a hydrogen atom to form the linear BeH ~2~ molecule.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-MmUzYmM5YzhlNWQyYjBiMzBmNGRmNmE3MmQyZWE5Zjg.-ap5"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So, using 3D molecule by Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation; 3D molecule: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beryllium-hydride-molecule-IR-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D molecule available under public domain)" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227149952.png)

**Figure 9.26**

The process of sp hybridization involves the mixing of an s orbital with
a single p orbital (conventionally the p ~x~ orbital), to form a set of
two sp hybrids. The two lobes of the sp hybrids point in opposite
directions to produce a linear molecule.

</div>

Other molecules whose electron domain geometry is linear and for whom
hybridization is necessary also form sp hybrid orbitals. Examples
include CO ~2~ and C ~2~ H ~2~ , which will be discussed further in the
next section on hybridization and multiple bonds.

It should be noted that molecules with trigonal bipyramidal or
octahedral electron geometries form different types of hybrids that also
involve the participation of one or more d orbitals. However, we will
not consider these types of hybrid orbitals here.

## Hybridization in Molecules with Double or Triple Bonds {#9.html#x-ck12-SHlicmlkaXphdGlvbiBpbiBNb2xlY3VsZXMgd2l0aCBEb3VibGUgb3IgVHJpcGxlIEJvbmRz_4-2ae}

The hybridization model helps explain molecules with double or triple
bonds. Consider the ethene molecule (C ~2~ H ~4~ ), which contains a
double covalent bond between the two carbon atoms and single bonds
between the carbon atoms and the hydrogen atoms. The entire molecule is
planar.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-MGE1YjAxMDU0Y2M2M2M5MjVjNzc4ODg0YzI2NGIyZWI.-eiv"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-MW-dimensions-2D.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227262973.png)

**Figure 9.27**

</div>

As can be seen in **Figure**
[above](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktNDQtRXRoeWxlbmUtc3RydWN0dXJhbC1mb3JtdWxh)
, the electron domain geometry around each carbon atom is trigonal
planar, which corresponds to sp ^2^ hybridization. Previously, we saw
carbon undergo sp ^3^ hybridization in a CH ~4~ molecule, so how does it
work in this case? As seen below, the electron promotion is the same,
but the hybridization occurs only between the single s orbital and two
of the three p orbitals. This generates a set of three sp ^2^ hybrids
along with an unhybridized 2p ~z~ orbital. Each orbital contains one
electron and is capable of forming a covalent bond.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227418322.png) </span>

The three sp ^2^ hybrid orbitals lie in one plane, while the
unhybridized 2p ~z~ orbital is oriented perpendicular to that plane. The
bonding in C ~2~ H ~4~ is explained as follows. One of the three sp ^2^
hybrids forms a bond by overlapping with the identical hybrid orbital on
the other carbon atom. The remaining two hybrid orbitals from bonds by
overlapping with the 1s orbital of a hydrogen atom. Finally, the 2p ~z~
orbitals on each carbon atom form another bond by overlapping with one
another sideways.

It is necessary to distinguish between the two types of covalent bonds
in a C ~2~ H ~4~ molecule. A **sigma bond (σ bond)** is a bond formed by
the overlap of orbitals in an end-to-end fashion, with the electron
density concentrated between the nuclei of the bonding atoms. A **pi
bond (π bond)** is a bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in a
side-by-side fashion, with the electron density concentrated above and
below the plane of the nuclei of the bonding atoms. **Figure**
[below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktODEtQzJINC1TaWdtYS1QaQ..) shows the
two types of bonding in C ~2~ H ~4~ . The sp ^2^ hybrid orbitals are
orange and the p ~z~ orbital is green. Three sigma bonds are formed by
each carbon atom with its hybrid orbitals. The pi bond is the “second”
bond of the double bond between the carbon atoms and is shown as an
elongated blue lobe that extends both above and below the plane of the
molecule, which contains the six atoms and all of the sigma bonds.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-NmRkYTYxNGViZjUyM2VjNDVmMzU3ZmU5NjYzM2I4MjY.-frw"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227533818.png)

**Figure 9.28**

The C ~2~ H ~4~ molecule contains five sigma bonds and one pi bond.
Sigma bonds are formed by a direct overlap of bonding orbitals, while a
pi bond is formed by a side-to-side overlap of unhybridized p orbitals.

</div>

In a conventional Lewis electron-dot structure, a double bond is shown
as two lines between the atoms, as in C=C. It is important to realize,
however, that the two bonds are different; one is a sigma bond, while
the other is a pi bond.

Ethyne (C ~2~ H ~2~ ) is a linear molecule with a triple bond between
the two carbon atoms. Since each carbon atom is bonded to two other
atoms and has no lone pairs, the hybridization of each carbon is sp.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227672404.png) </span>

Again, the promotion of an electron in the carbon atom occurs in the
same way. However, the hybridization now involves only the 2s orbital
and the 2p ~x~ orbital, leaving the 2p ~y~ and the 2p ~z~ orbitals
unhybridized.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227782064.png) </span>

The sigma bond between the two carbon atoms is formed from sp hybrid
orbitals, and the remaining hybrid orbitals form sigma bonds to the two
hydrogen atoms. Both the p ~y~ and the p ~z~ orbitals on each carbon
atom form pi bonds with each other. As with ethene, these side-to-side
overlaps are not directly on the line between the two bonded atoms.
Additionally, these two pi bonds are perpendicular to one another (
**Figure** [below](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktNDYtQzJIMi1TaWdtYS1QaQ..)
); one pi bond is above and below the line of the molecule, while the
other is in front of and behind the page.

<div id="9.html#x-ck12-YWY1ZmEwN2Q5ZDdkYjFmZmVmYTljN2FhNDAwYTAwOWE.-psg"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson, using 3D model by Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation; 3D molecule: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetylene-CRC-IR-3D-vdW.png" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D model available under public domain)" -->
![](ck12_9_files/20151009235227897701.png)

**Figure 9.29**

The C ~2~ H ~2~ molecule contains a triple bond between the two carbon
atoms, one of which is a sigma bond, and two of which are pi bonds. The
pi bonds come from overlap between the p ~y~ and the p ~z~ orbitals on
each carbon.

</div>

In general, single bonds between atoms are always sigma bonds. Double
bonds are comprised of one sigma and one pi bond. Triple bonds are
comprised of one sigma bond and two pi bonds.

## Molecular Orbitals {#9.html#x-ck12-TW9sZWN1bGFyIE9yYml0YWxz_4-swp}

In most of the above illustrations, bonds are depicted as two
overlapping atomic orbitals that still retain their original shapes.
However, a more accurate way to show the electron density after the bond
has formed is shown in **Figures**
[above](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktNDYtQzJIMi1TaWdtYS1QaQ..) and
[above](#9.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMDktODEtQzJINC1TaWdtYS1QaQ..) . When
atomic orbitals combine to make covalent bonds, the results are new
orbitals known as **molecular orbitals** . Molecular orbital theory
plays an important role in our understanding of various molecular
properties.

## Lesson Summary {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._4-m4i}

-   Valence bond theory describes the formation of covalent bonds in
    terms of the overlap of singly occupied atomic orbitals.
-   The hybridization of nonequivalent atomic orbitals is necessary to
    correctly predict the bonding and molecular geometries of
    many molecules. The types of hybrid orbitals that form on the
    central atom are dictated by the electron domain geometry.
-   Sigma bonds are formed by the end-to-end overlap of
    bonding orbitals. Pi bonds are formed by the side-to-side overlap of
    p orbitals. Single bonds are normally sigma bonds. A double or
    triple bond consists of one sigma bond and either one or two
    pi bonds.
-   Atomic orbitals from different atoms overlap to form
    molecular orbitals.

## Lesson Review Questions {#9.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._4-cot}

1.  Why do atoms “promote” electrons to higher orbitals in order to form
    bonds?
2.  Describe the type of hybrid orbitals formed corresponding to each of
    the following electron domain geometries:
    1.  tetrahedral
    2.  trigonal planar
    3.  linear

3.  In sp ^3^ hybridization, how many hybrid orbitals are there? How do
    the hybrid orbitals compare to one another?
4.  What is the hybridization state of Si in SiH ~4~ ?
5.  What hybrid orbitals are used by the nitrogen atoms in H ~2~ N-NH
    ~2~ ?
6.  What types of bonds make up single, double, and triple bonds?
7.  What hybrid orbitals are used by the carbon atoms in each of the
    following:
    1.  H ~3~ C-CH=CH ~2~
    2.  CO ~2~

8.  Describe the covalent bonds in each of the molecules from the
    question above.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#9.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_4-n6x}

-   Discussion of hybrid orbitals:

[http://www.uwosh.edu/faculty\_staff/gutow/Orbitals/N/What\_are\_hybrid\_orbitals.shtml](What_are_hybrid_orbitals.shtml)

-   Animation of orbital hybridizations:

[http://www.bluffton.edu/\~bergerd/classes/CEM222/Handouts/spanimation.html](spanimation.html)

## Points to Consider {#9.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_4-kxq}

-   How does molecular geometry influence reactivity?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686114] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#9.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-o2a}

1.  User:Apostoloff/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Elektronenformel\_Punkte\_H20.svg](File:Elektronenformel_Punkte_H20.svg) .
    Public Domain
2.  User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons and
    User:Sarregouset/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetylene-2D.svg](File:Acetylene-2D.svg) .
    Public Domain
3.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beryllium-hydride-molecule-IR-3D-balls.png](File:Beryllium-hydride-molecule-IR-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain
4.  User:Benji9072/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Carbon\_dioxide\_structure.png](File:Carbon_dioxide_structure.png) .
    Public Domain
5.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boron-trifluoride-3D-balls.png](File:Boron-trifluoride-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain
6.  (''left'') Pearson Scott Foresman; (''right'') Ben Mills
    (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [(''Left'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tetrahedron\_(PSF).png; (''Right'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methane-CRC-MW-3D-balls.png](File:Methane-CRC-MW-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain
7.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methane-2D-stereo.svg](File:Methane-2D-stereo.svg) .
    Public Domain
8.  (''left'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia
    Commons); (''right'') Perditax. [(''left'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phosphorus-pentachloride-3D-balls.png; (''right'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Trigonal\_bipyramid.png](File:Trigonal_bipyramid.png) .
    Public Domain
9.  3D molecule: Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons);
    Octahedron: Jodi So. [3D molecule:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur-hexafluoride-3D-balls.png;
    Octahedron: CK-12
    Foundation](File:Sulfur-hexafluoride-3D-balls.png;%20Octahedron:%20CK-12%20Foundation) .
    3D molecule: Public Domain; Octahedron: CC BY-NC 3.0
10. (''left'') User:Booyabazooka/Wikimedia Commons; (''right'') Ben
    Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [(''left'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia\_lone\_electron\_pair.svg; (''right'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia-3D-balls-A.png](File:Ammonia-3D-balls-A.png) .
    Public Domain
11. (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [(''left'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Water-dimensions-from-Greenwood%26Earnshaw-2D.png; (''right'')
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Water-3D-balls-A.png](File:Water-3D-balls-A.png) .
    Public Domain
12. User:Joanjoc/Ca.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Taula\_peri%C3%B2dica\_electronegativitat.png](File:Taula_peri%C3%B2dica_electronegativitat.png) .
    Public Domain
13. User:Sansculotte/De.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wasser.png](File:Wasser.png) .
    Public Domain
14. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogen-fluoride-elpot-transparent-3D-balls.png](File:Hydrogen-fluoride-elpot-transparent-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain
15. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lattice-enthalpy-NaCl-3D-ionic.png](File:Lattice-enthalpy-NaCl-3D-ionic.png) .
    Public Domain
16. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-acetate-2D-skeletal.png](File:Sodium-acetate-2D-skeletal.png) .
    Public Domain
17. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dipole-dipole-interaction-in-HCl-2D.png](File:Dipole-dipole-interaction-in-HCl-2D.png) .
    Public Domain
18. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
19. Christopher Auyeung and Jodi So. [CK-12
    Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
20. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogen-bonding-in-water-2D.png](File:Hydrogen-bonding-in-water-2D.png) .
    Public Domain
21. User:Mcpazzo/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:WikipediaHDonorAcceptor.png](File:WikipediaHDonorAcceptor.png) .
    Public Domain
22. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
23. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
24. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
25. Jodi So, using 3D molecule by Ben Mills
    (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [CK-12 Foundation; 3D
    molecule:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Boron-trifluoride-3D-balls.png](File:Boron-trifluoride-3D-balls.png) .
    CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D molecule available under public domain)
26. Jodi So, using 3D molecule by Ben Mills
    (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [CK-12 Foundation; 3D
    molecule:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beryllium-hydride-molecule-IR-3D-balls.png](File:Beryllium-hydride-molecule-IR-3D-balls.png) .
    CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D molecule available under public domain)
27. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-MW-dimensions-2D.png](File:Ethylene-CRC-MW-dimensions-2D.png) .
    Public Domain
28. Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
29. Zachary Wilson, using 3D model by Ben Mills
    (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [CK-12 Foundation; 3D
    molecule:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetylene-CRC-IR-3D-vdW.png](File:Acetylene-CRC-IR-3D-vdW.png) .
    CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D model available under public domain)

<span id="10.html"></span>

# The Mole {#10.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE1vbGU.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_10_files/20151009235236552940.jpeg)
</span>

Humans have long been interested in how much of something they have.
Ancient commerce was often conducted by trading goods for a certain
weight of gold or silver. Both religious and civil statutes forbade the
use of false weights in conducting business. In chemistry, we routinely
weigh materials to determine how much of a chemical we are adding to a
reaction. The amount of product is often weighed to determine reaction
yield. Chemical solutions are prepared by weighing a specified amount of
material and dissolving it in a defined volume of solvent. Weight and
volume are two different ways to measure how much of a substance is
present. In this chapter, we will explore how to express amounts of
materials in a way that indicates the number of atoms or molecules
contained in a given sample.

^User:Thelmadatter/Wikimedia\\ Commons.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:BalanceMineralPachuca.JPG.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686116] -->

# The Mole Concept {#10.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE1vbGUgQ29uY2VwdA..}

## Lesson Objectives {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-4tr}

-   Describe three methods of measuring matter.
-   Define Avogadro’s number.
-   Define mole.
-   Perform calculations to convert between the number of moles and the
    number of particles in a sample.
-   Calculate the molar mass of a substance.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-wrs}

-   **mole** : The name given to a group of 6.022 × 10 ^23^ items.
-   **Avogadro’s number** : 6.022 × 10 ^23^ .
-   **representative particle** : The smallest unit of a substance that
    retains its chemical identity.
-   **molar mass** : The mass of one mole of representative particles of
    a substance.

## Check Your Understanding {#10.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-xqw}

-   What units are used to describe the atomic mass (or weight) of an
    element?

## Introduction {#10.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-2ji}

As you have learned, matter comprises most everything around us. The
atoms and molecules that make up this matter are so tiny that you cannot
see them with the naked eye. Imagine you had a bag of apples. You could
measure, rather easily, the weight of the apples, the volume of the
apples, and the number of apples in your bag. But what if you wanted to
know the number of atoms that were in those apples? How could you
possibly count something you cannot even see? In this lesson you will
learn about the mole concept, which enables scientist to quantify things
as tiny as atoms.

## Determining the Amount of Material {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgdGhlIEFtb3VudCBvZiBNYXRlcmlhbA..-fdk}

### Determining by Weight {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgYnkgV2VpZ2h0-fev}

One common method of seeing how much material is present is to weigh it.
This practice goes back many centuries. The Code of Hammurabi
(established around 1760 B.C.) spelled out methods for assuring fair
weights in business and trade dealings. Many societies had harsh
penalties for using false weights. Today we have state and federal
agencies that make sure the scales used for business are accurate.

Shopping in a grocery store provides many opportunities for purchases by
weight. Most fresh meat and fresh vegetables are marketed by weight, as
are flour, sugar, and many other packaged goods.

### Determining by Volume {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgYnkgVm9sdW1l-xpa}

Volume is another way of measuring material. Gases cannot be easily
weighed, but their volume can be determined quickly and accurately.
Liquid chemicals as well as foods and beverages are also sold by volume.
Gasoline for our cars and trucks is sold by the gallon. At the grocery
store, we can buy a gallon of milk or a two-liter bottle of soda pop.

### Determining by Counting {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgYnkgQ291bnRpbmc.-aas}

The third way to indicate how much of something is present is to count
the objects. At the grocery store, we could buy a dozen eggs, six
donuts, or two loaves of bread. We might buy movie tickets or t-shirts,
based on price per item. The weight or volume for many of items could be
determined, but counting is generally faster for small numbers of
objects and does not require any additional measurement tools.

### Converting between Different Measurements {#10.html#x-ck12-Q29udmVydGluZyBiZXR3ZWVuIERpZmZlcmVudCBNZWFzdXJlbWVudHM.-3ky}

Sometimes one method of measurement is easiest but does not provide us
with the information that we need. For example, say you had a huge sack
of pennies and wanted to know how much it was worth. You could count
them, but it might be much faster to weigh the sack. Say you find out
that you have 4.801 pounds (2177.5 grams) of pennies. If you know that
each penny weighs 2.5 grams (on average), then you could divide 2177.5
by 2.5, and you would know that you have about 871 pennies, or \$8.71.
Such conversions become even more important when dealing with much more
miniscule objects, such as atoms or molecules. Because the numbers
involved when talking about amounts of atoms are so large, a new unit
was developed to make discussing such amounts easier. This unit is
referred to as the mole.

## The Mole {#10.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE1vbGU.-nua}

<div
id="10.html#x-ck12-NjQyNWFiMDU4MzE1NmVkYzY3NzExNmQxYWUxYzgzMzI.-9d2"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="C. Sentier" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Avogadro_Amedeo.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_10_files/20151009235236688593.jpeg)

**Figure 10.1**

Amadeo Avogadro (1776-1856)

</div>

As we will see in the chapter on gases, the Italian scientist Amadeo
Avogadro (1776-1856) proposed that the volume of a gas is directly
proportional to the number of atoms or molecules in a given sample. Due
to the vast quantities of atoms and molecules in an easily observable
sample of any material, chemists needed a name that can stand for a very
large number of items. A **mole** (abbreviated "mol") is the name given
to a group of 6.022 × 10 ^23^ items. This value is named **Avogadro’s
number** as a tribute to his influential work.

The word "mole" is analogous to the word "dozen", in that it is a name
that stands for a number. A dozen donuts is simply another way of saying
12 donuts. Similarly, a mole of donuts would be another way of saying
6.022 × 10 ^23^ donuts. Obviously, this would be an excessive amount of
donuts. However, it becomes a more useful quantity when talking about
objects like molecules. One mole of water molecules is equivalent to
6.022 × 10 ^23^ molecules of water. This amount of liquid water has a
volume of a little over one tablespoon, which is a very normal amount to
be dealing with.

Technically speaking, the mole is defined as the amount of carbon atoms
in exactly 12 grams of carbon-12 (the isotope of carbon that contains 6
protons and 6 neutrons). This value cannot be determined by literally
counting atoms, but it has been calculated in a variety of ways. When
written out to 8 significant figures, the currently accepted value is
6.0221413 × 10 ^23^ . However, because we don't usually deal with other
measurements that are this precise, the rounded value of 6.022 × 10 ^23^
is sufficient for any situations that you are likely to encounter.

The mole is such an important parameter in chemistry that Mole Day was
established in the U.S. on October 23, where it is celebrated from 6:02
AM to 6:02 PM. The day was originally established to generate interest
in chemistry.

The scale of Avogadro’s number is nearly incomprehensible in terms of
everyday objects. This can be illustrated with examples like the
following problem, in which we use the dimensional analysis technique
from the chapter *Measurement* to convert between units.

**Example 10.1**

If you were given one million dollars every second, how long would it
take to accumulate a mole of dollars?

*Answer:*

![\\mathrm{1 \\ mol \\ of \\ dollars \\times (\\frac{6.022 \\times
10\^{23} \\ dollars}{1 \\ mol \\ of \\ dollars}) (\\frac{1 \\
sec}{1,000,000 \\ dollars}) (\\frac{1 \\ min}{60 \\ sec}) (\\frac{1 \\
hour}{60 \\ min})(\\frac{1 \\ day}{24 \\ hours})(\\frac{1 \\ year}{365
\\ days}) = 1.91 \\times 10\^{10} \\
years}](ck12_math_images_dir/844ae66282f33a1e97a18a32f883ed11.png)

Even at this very fast rate, it would take over 19 billion years to
obtain a mole of dollars. To put this into perspective, the universe is
believed to be about 14 billion years old, and our Sun will run out of
fuel and burn out about 6 billion years from now.

### Representative Particles {#10.html#x-ck12-UmVwcmVzZW50YXRpdmUgUGFydGljbGVz-3ji}

When we talk about one mole of a particular chemical substance, it is
important to know exactly how much material is being referenced. For
example, the phrase "a mole of water molecules" is often shortened to "a
mole of water." When we talk about moles of a molecular substance, it is
assumed that we are referring to moles of molecules. Similarly, the
phrase "five moles of carbon dioxide" would refer to five moles of CO
~2~ molecules. In these cases, the molecule is sometimes called a
**representative particle** , which is simply the smallest unit of a
substance that retains its chemical identity.

What about when we are discussing non-molecular substances? Recall that
an ionic compound does not exist as discrete molecules, but rather as an
extended three-dimensional network of ions called a crystal lattice. The
empirical formula of an ionic compound tells us the ratio of the ions in
the crystal. In these cases, one mole of the substance is assumed to
mean one mole of each ion in the empirical formula. For example, one
mole of sodium oxide (Na ~2~ O) refers to two moles of sodium ions (Na
^+^ ) and one mole of oxide ions (O ^2-^ ). The empirical formula gives
you the representative particle for ionic substances. Unlike molecules,
these representative particles do not exist as isolated units (sodium
oxide does not exist as small clusters of three atoms each).

In the case of pure metals, the representative particle is simply the
atom. One mole of zinc refers to a mole of Zn atoms.

**Example 10.2**

Calculate the number of moles of iron atoms that are present in 2 moles
of Fe ~2~ O ~3~ .

![\\mathrm{2 \\ mol \\ Fe\_2O\_3 \\times (\\frac{2 \\ mol \\ Fe}{1 \\
mol \\ Fe\_2O\_3})= 4 \\ mol \\
Fe}](ck12_math_images_dir/c1087b9efdf6cccb70b4dd4480a139c7.png)

**Example 10.3**

Calculate the number of atoms that must be present in 3.05 moles of Pb.

![\\mathrm{3.05 \\ mol \\ Pb \\times (\\frac{6.022 \\times 10\^{23} \\
atoms \\ Pb}{1 \\ mol \\ Pb}) = 1.84 \\times 10\^{24} \\ atoms \\
Pb}](ck12_math_images_dir/ccae02c73c6d8f506b8dcb7719002f93.png)

## Molar Mass {#10.html#x-ck12-TW9sYXIgTWFzcw..-jot}

Because we are not able to count individual atoms, it is important to
have a way to convert between amounts, which are expressed in moles, and
a unit of quantity that we can more easily measure, such as mass. We
begin by looking at the periodic table, which tells us the relative
masses of various elements.

### Molar Masses of the Elements {#10.html#x-ck12-TW9sYXIgTWFzc2VzIG9mIHRoZSBFbGVtZW50cw..-84h}

As you learned previously, the average atomic masses found on the
periodic table are in atomic mass units (amu). For example, one atom of
the most abundant isotope of hydrogen has a mass of approximately 1 amu,
and one atom of helium has a mass of about 4 amu. Atomic masses are
relative masses; they are based on the definition that one amu is equal
to 1/12 ^th^ of the mass of a single atom of carbon-12. Therefore, one
atom of carbon-12 has a mass of 12 amu, which is three times heavier
than an atom of helium. This ratio would hold for any number of carbon
and helium atoms. One hundred carbon-12 atoms would have three times the
mass of one hundred helium atoms. By extension, 12.00 g of carbon-12
would contain the same number of atoms as 4.00 g of helium.

The relative scale of atomic masses in amu is also a relative scale of
masses in grams. We said before that the mole is officially equal to the
number of carbon atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12. In other words, one
carbon-12 atom has a mass of exactly 12 amu, and one mole of carbon
atoms has a mass of exactly 12 grams. This relationship is true for all
substances. If one atom of helium has a mass of 4.00 amu, one mole of
helium atoms has a mass of 4.00 g. One molecule of water has a mass of
18.0 amu, so one mole of water molecules has a mass of 18.0 grams.
**Molar mass** is defined as the mass of one mole of representative
particles of a substance. It is expressed in units of grams per mole
(g/mol).

The values on the periodic table can be read either as average atomic
masses or as molar masses. For example, the mass associated with
chlorine is 35.45, even though no atoms of chlorine actually have a mass
of 35.45 amu. However, in naturally occurring samples of chlorine atoms,
about 75% will be chlorine-35 atoms (which have a mass of 35.0 amu), and
about 25% will be chlorine-37 atoms (which have a mass of 37.0 amu).
Since any usable quantity of chlorine contains a very, very large number
of atoms, one mole of chlorine atoms will contain a mixture of these two
isotopes in this ratio, resulting in a sample with a mass of 35.45
grams. Therefore chlorine has a molar mass of 35.45 g/mol.

### Molar Masses of Compounds {#10.html#x-ck12-TW9sYXIgTWFzc2VzIG9mIENvbXBvdW5kcw..-fuo}

The molecular formula of carbon dioxide is CO ~2~ . One molecule of
carbon dioxide consists of 1 atom of carbon and 2 atoms of oxygen. We
can calculate the molar mass of carbon dioxide by adding together the
molar masses of each atom present in the compound.

<dl id="x-ck12-NmVlMGI5MDU2OTlkMTFmNTc0NjhhMDBiOWJmNTdmNTE.-nbc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NmVlMGI5MDU2OTlkMTFmNTc0NjhhMDBiOWJmNTdmNTE.-zeb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NmVlMGI5MDU2OTlkMTFmNTc0NjhhMDBiOWJmNTdmNTE.-eul">
<dd>
12.01 g/mol + 2(16.00 g/mol) = 44.01 g/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
One mole of carbon dioxide molecules would have a mass of 44.01 grams.
What about for an ionic compound? The molar mass of sodium sulfide (Na
~2~ S) can be calculated as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-ODI5MmZmZWFiZWY0YzUyYWQ1OTFlNTg0OGZkNDQyNmU.-roc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODI5MmZmZWFiZWY0YzUyYWQ1OTFlNTg0OGZkNDQyNmU.-os1">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODI5MmZmZWFiZWY0YzUyYWQ1OTFlNTg0OGZkNDQyNmU.-bil">
<dd>
2(22.99 g/mol) + 32.06 g/mol = 78.04 g/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because Na ~2~ S is the empirical formula for this substance, the
representative particle consists of two sodium atoms and one sulfur
atom.

**Example 10.4**

What is the molar mass of hydrogen peroxide (H ~2~ O ~2~ ).

*Answer:*

H - 2 × 1.0 g/mol = 2.0 g/mol

O - 2 × 16.0 g/mol = 32.0 g/mol

H ~2~ O ~2~ = 34.0 g/mol

**Example 10.5**

How many moles of carbon are present in a 10.00 gram sample?

*Answer:*

![\\mathrm{10.00 \\ g \\ C \\times (\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ C}{12.01 \\ g \\
C}) = 0.8326 \\ mol \\
C}](ck12_math_images_dir/edc4fe96681869f65ca992bc18b52c40.png)

## Lesson Summary {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-xa2}

-   One mole of any chemical substance contains 6.022 x 10 ^23^
    representative particles.
-   The masses on the periodic table can be read as average atomic
    masses or as molar masses.
-   Molar mass is the mass of one mole of any given substance.

## Lesson Review Questions {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-gh6}

1.  Imagine that you have 1 mole of coins, each of which is 1.5
    mm thick. If they were placed in a single stack, how tall would the
    stack be (in km)? If the closest distance between the earth and the
    moon is 356,400 km, would the coins reach the moon? (Hint: Use the
    technique of dimensional analysis.)
2.  Calculate the number of moles of N that must be present in 3 moles
    of NH ~3~ .
3.  Calculate the number of moles of oxygen that must be present in 2
    moles of C ~6~ H ~12~ O ~6~ .
4.  How many moles of gold are present in a sample containing 1.81 x 10
    ^24^ gold atoms?
5.  How many atoms are in 0.065 moles of Hg?
6.  Calculate the number of Br ^-^ ions in 0.0038 moles of CaBr ~2~ .
7.  Calculate the molar mass of K ~2~ Cr ~2~ O ~7~ .
8.  Calculate the molar mass of dinitrogen tetroxide (N ~2~ O ~4~ ).

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#10.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-uhl}

-   Avogadro biography:
    [http://www.bulldog.u-net.com/avogadro/avoga.html](avoga.html)
-   The mole – its history and use:
    [http://www.visionlearning.com/library/module\_viewer.php?mid=53](module_viewer.php?mid=53)
-   Mole Day:
    [http://chemistry.about.com/od/historyofchemistry/a/mole-day.htm](mole-day.htm)
-   National Mole Day Foundation: [http://www.moleday.org/]()

## Points to Consider {#10.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-xhs}

-   How can we use this information to determine the number of atoms or
    molecules in a given amount of a material?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686116] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686117] -->

# Mass, Volume, and the Mole {#10.html#x-ck12-TWFzcywgVm9sdW1lLCBhbmQgdGhlIE1vbGU.}

## Lesson Objectives {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-7c9}

-   Be able to convert between mass and moles of a substance.
-   Explain how Avogadro’s hypothesis relates to volumes of gases at
    standard temperature and pressure.
-   Convert between moles and volume of a gas at STP.
-   Calculate the mass of a gas at STP when given its volume.
-   Make conversions between mass, number of particles, and gas volumes.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-f1v}

-   **standard temperature and pressure (STP)** : A pressure of one
    atmosphere and a temperature of 0°C.

## Check Your Understanding {#10.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-fuz}

-   What is the value of Avogadro’s number, and what does it represent?

## Introduction {#10.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-gma}

As we discussed in the previous lesson, there are many different ways to
measure how much of something you have. Usually, there is a particular
unit of measurement that is easiest to use, depending on what you are
trying to quantify. In this lesson you will learn the significance of
using moles in converting between measurements and in understanding how
much of something you have.

## Mass and Moles {#10.html#x-ck12-TWFzcyBhbmQgTW9sZXM._1-px6}

When we need materials for a chemical reaction, counting out a certain
number of atoms or molecules is obviously impractical, so we weigh out a
certain mass of each substance instead. As we will see in a later
chapter, chemical equations tell us the molar ratios in which chemicals
react with one another. This information can be used to determine how
much of one chemical is needed to fully react with a set amount of
another substance.

**Example 10.6**

In a certain reaction, we want to use two moles of silver nitrate, AgNO
~3~ . We need to know how many grams of silver nitrate will be needed.
First, we determine the molecular weight of the chemical:

Ag: 1 x 107.9 g/mol = 107.9 g/mol

N: 1 x 14.0 g/mol = 14.0 g/mol

O: 3 x 16.0 g/mol = 48.0 g/mol

AgNO ~3~ - 169.9 g/mol

Because 169.9 grams of AgNO ~3~ is equivalent to one mole of AgNO ~3~ ,
we can use that as a conversion factor. We start with the amount that we
need (2.0 moles), and convert to the desired units (grams of AgNO ~3~ ):

<dl id="x-ck12-xcp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-aki">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2.0 \\ moles \\ AgNO\_3 \\times \\frac{169.9 \\ grams \\
AgNO\_3 }{1 \\ mole \\ AgNO\_3 } = 339.8 \\ grams \\
AgNO\_3}](ck12_math_images_dir/f1c611f55b0b505b4b50324019119e21.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The units of moles cancel, and we are left with grams.

**Example 10.7**

In another reaction, we determine that we need 0.45 moles of NaBr. We
check our chemical supplies and find we have 37.2 grams NaBr on hand. Do
we have enough for this reaction?

Na: 1 x 23.0 g/mol = 23.0 g/mol

Br: 1 x 79.9 g/mol = 79.9 g/mol

NaBr - 102.9 g/mol

<dl id="x-ck12-won">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uh6">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{0.45 \\ moles \\ NaBr \\times \\frac{102.9 \\ grams \\ NaBr
}{1 \\ mole \\ NaBr } = 46.3 \\ grams \\
NaBr}](ck12_math_images_dir/4347169ecda420aefff495123cbcc187.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
We need 0.45 moles, which our calculation tells us is equivalent to 46.3
grams. We only have 37.2 grams available, so we do not have enough for
this experiment.

**Example 10.8**

We run an experiment that gives us 65.4 grams of Rb ~2~ O as a product.
How many moles did we obtain?

First, we need to calculate the molar mass of the compound:

Rb: 2 x 85.5 g/mol = 171.0 g/mol

O: 1 x 16.0 g/mol = 16.0 g/mol

Rb ~2~ O - 187.0 g/mol

<dl id="x-ck12-bbo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hod">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{65.4 \\ g \\ Rb\_2O \\times \\frac{1 \\ mol \\ Rb\_2O }{187.0
\\ g \\ Rb\_2O } = 0.350 \\ mol \\
Rb\_2O}](ck12_math_images_dir/dc41f87cfdbb25abc16b8042a3b1f9b0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
We obtained 0.350 moles of Rb ~2~ O. Note that the conversion factor of
molar mass (187.0 grams Rb ~2~ O = 1 mole Rb ~2~ O) was written
"upside-down," with the grams on the bottom and the moles on top. This
is so that the unwanted units (grams) cancel, leaving only the desired
units (moles) in our final answer. Whenever we have this type of
conversion factor, the choice of which quantity to put in the numerator
and denominator depends on the units that we wish to cancel.

## Volume and Moles {#10.html#x-ck12-Vm9sdW1lIGFuZCBNb2xlcw.._1-avc}

### Avogadro’s Hypothesis {#10.html#x-ck12-QXZvZ2Fkcm_igJlzIEh5cG90aGVzaXM._1-shr}

Avogadro proposed that equal volumes of gases at the same temperature
and pressure contain the same number of particles, and therefore the
same combining ratios. This means that at a given temperature and
pressure, one mole of any gas will take up the same volume, regardless
of its identity. This is very different than the case for solids and
liquids. For example, a mole of water takes up significantly more space
than a mole of gold, which is quite dense.

Because different gases have different molar masses, the mass contained
in a set volume of gas *will* depend on the identity of the gas. For
example, at a certain temperature and pressure, one liter of hydrogen
gas has a mass of 0.0899 grams, while a liter of oxygen gas has a mass
of 1.43 grams. This ratio is approximately equal to 1:16, which is the
ratio of the molar masses for these two elements. The **Figure**
[below](#10.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTAtMDUtUmVsYXRpdmUtTWFzc2Vz) shows the
amount of mass contained in a given volume of various gases.

<div
id="10.html#x-ck12-ZGM4OWM4ODM1NTA0NWNlYzczYjllYjY4OTE4ZDRlYjE.-jd7"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_10_files/20151009235236781986.png)

**Figure 10.2**

Relative masses of various gases.

</div>

The implications of Avogadro's work were extensive and helped in
developing the kinetic theory of gases in the last half of the 19 ^th^
century. They also were useful as practical guidelines for how to run
reactions with gases. For example, water has a formula of H ~2~ O, which
means that for each mole of oxygen atoms, there are two moles of
hydrogen atoms. A complete reaction can occur with no leftover hydrogen
or oxygen only if the volume of hydrogen used is twice the volume of
oxygen used. Because the volume of a gas is easier to measure than its
mass, this is a useful experimental tool.

**Example 10.9**

Let’s say you have three balloons. One is filled with hydrogen gas, one
with oxygen gas, and one with nitrogen gas. The molar masses of these
gases are 2 g/mol for H ~2~ , 32 g/mol for O ~2~ , and 28 g/mol for N
~2~ . If all three balloons are the same volume, which contains the most
mass, and which contains the least?

*Answer:*

Based on their molar masses, hydrogen is the lightest molecule, and
oxygen is the heaviest. Because all three volumes are the same, each
balloon contains the same number of gas molecules. Therefore, the
hydrogen balloon will have the lowest mass, and the oxygen balloon will
have the highest.

### Calculations Involving Gases {#10.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpb25zIEludm9sdmluZyBHYXNlcw.._1-0l1}

Because the volume of a gas is dependent on the pressure and
temperature, scientists found it useful to collect data at fixed
pressures and temperatures so that they could be compared between
different gases. A pressure of one atmosphere and a temperature of 0°C
is known as **standard temperature and pressure (STP)** . Under these
conditions, one mole of any gas takes up a volume of 22.4 liters. This
information allows us to convert between liters and moles for gases at
STP.

**Example 10.10**

At STP, we have 46.2 liters of helium. How many moles of helium do we
have?

![\\mathrm{(46.2 \\ L \\ He)(\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ He}{22.4 \\ L \\
He})=2.06 \\ mol \\
He}](ck12_math_images_dir/e92247b2532f2e5603ec2625ea092903.png)

**Example 10.11**

What volume does 4.96 moles of O ~2~ occupy at STP?

![\\mathrm{(4.96 \\ mol \\ O\_2)(\\frac{22.4 \\ L \\ O\_2}{1 \\ mol \\
O\_2})=111 \\ L \\
O\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/0f0862fbfdb016a0fbd25c7c286087cf.png)

If we know the volume of a gas at STP, we can combine this information
with its molar mass to determine how much mass is present in the sample.

**Example 10.12**

What is the mass of 86.7 liters of N ~2~ at STP?

The molar mass of N ~2~ is 28.0 grams/mole, and because one mole of a
gas at STP takes up 22.4 L of space, we can perform the following
calculation.

![\\mathrm{(86.7 \\ L \\ N\_2)(\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ N\_2}{22.4 \\ L \\
N\_2})(\\frac{28.0 \\ g \\ N\_2}{1 \\ mol \\ N\_2})=108 \\ g \\
N\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/e1e249baec54ca6fde0d332ba504fa61.png)

The conversion factors are arranged so that all units cancel except for
grams, which are the units of our final answer.

When studying chemical reactions, we frequently need to convert back and
forth between mass, volume, moles, and number of particles. This will be
expanded upon in our chapter on stoichiometry. **Figure**
[below](#10.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTAtMDYtTW9sZS1SZWxhdGlvbnM.) summarizes
the relationships that we have studies so far between these different
quantities.

<div
id="10.html#x-ck12-ZTUxOGE2YjJiZTA3ZDNiNjFiOTkyYTIwMTg0Y2UyODg.-tgc"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_10_files/20151009235236992321.png)

**Figure 10.3**

Mole relations for mass, volume, and particles.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-2uk}

-   Molar masses can be used to determine the mass of a given quantity
    of material.
-   At standard temperature and pressure (1 atmosphere of pressure and
    0°C), one mole of a gas occupies 22.4 liters.
-   The mass of a sample can be calculated for a given volume of a known
    gas at STP using Avogadro's number.

## Lesson Review Questions {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-3si}

1.  Calculate the number of moles in 56.3 grams of CaCO ~3~ .
2.  What is the mass (in grams) of 3.2 moles of glucose (C ~6~ H ~12~ O
    ~6~ )?
3.  You are running an experiment that needs three moles of NaHCO ~3~ ,
    and you only have 150 grams of material. Calculate the number of
    moles you have, and determine if this is enough to run
    the experiment.
4.  A balloon contains 96 grams of CO ~2~ gas at STP. How many moles are
    present?
5.  How many atoms are there in 12.2 grams of Zn?
6.  A container holds 68.5 liters of HBr gas. What is the mass of HBr in
    the container?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#10.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-bg4}

-   Mole-mass calculations:
    [http://www.ausetute.com.au/massmole.html](massmole.html)
-   Molar mass calculations:
    [http://misterguch.brinkster.net/molarmass.html](molarmass.html)
-   Gas calculations:
    [http://www.sciencegeek.net/Chemistry/taters/Unit5MolarVolume.htm](Unit5MolarVolume.htm)

## Points to Consider {#10.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-k1c}

-   How can you use information about the composition of a substance to
    determine its chemical formula?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686117] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686118] -->

# Chemical Formulas {#10.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgRm9ybXVsYXM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-q0j}

-   Use a chemical formula or mass data to calculate the percent
    composition of a compound.
-   Use the percent composition of a compound to calculate the mass of
    an element in a given sample.
-   Be able to calculate the empirical formula for a compound when given
    percent composition data.
-   Be able to calculate the molecular formula for a compound when you
    know its molar mass and its empirical formula.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-sqm}

-   **percent composition** : The percent by mass of each element in
    a compound.
-   **empirical formula** : An elemental formula showing the lowest
    whole-number ratio of the elements in a compound.
-   **molecular formula** : A formula showing how many atoms of each
    element are present in one molecule of a molecular compound.

## Check Your Understanding {#10.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-qi7}

-   How can you calculate the amount of a substance in moles from its
    mass and its molar mass?

## Introduction {#10.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-nq1}

Packaged foods that you eat typically have nutritional information
provided on the label. The label of a popular brand of peanut butter (
**Figure** [below](#10.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMTAtMTMtUGVhbnV0LUJ1dHRlcg..)
) reveals that one serving size is considered to be 32 g. The label also
gives the masses of various types of compounds that are present in each
serving. One serving contains 7 g of protein, 15 g of fat, and 3 g of
sugar. This information can be used to determine the composition of the
peanut butter on a percent by mass basis. For example, to calculate the
percent of protein in the peanut butter, we could perform the following
calculation:

<dl id="x-ck12-gkz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-8ds">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-xwi">
<dd>
![\\dfrac{7 \\ \\text{g protein}}{32 \\ \\text{g}} \\times 100\\% =
22\\% \\
\\text{protein}](ck12_math_images_dir/213667c3eb65b95446ba5d4b1c4d31b4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<div
id="10.html#x-ck12-Mjg3MGYxZGRjZDdkYTVhNWU3NTM0NDJiNTY1NGIzM2M.-bip"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_10_files/20151009235237141188.jpeg)

**Figure 10.4**

Foods like peanut butter provide nutritional information on the label in
the form of masses of different types of compounds present per serving.

</div>

In a similar way, chemists often need to know what elements are present
in a compound and in what percentages. The **percent composition** is
the percent by mass of each element in a compound. It is calculated in a
way that is similar to what we just saw for the peanut butter.

## Percent Composition and Mass {#10.html#x-ck12-UGVyY2VudCBDb21wb3NpdGlvbiBhbmQgTWFzcw.._2-07p}

### Determining Percent Composition from Mass Data {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgUGVyY2VudCBDb21wb3NpdGlvbiBmcm9tIE1hc3MgRGF0YQ.._2-fzv}

We can calculate percent composition based on the following formula:

<dl id="x-ck12-3kl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-t5r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-h2k">
<dd>
![\\% \\ \\text{by mass} = \\frac{\\text{mass of element}}{\\text{mass
of compound}} \\times
100\\%](ck12_math_images_dir/d2e3dfa58b463e92dd7afc13ec1752a1.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The example below shows how the percent composition of a compound can be
calculated based on mass data:

**Example 10.13**

A certain newly synthesized compound is known to contain the elements
zinc and oxygen. When a 20.00 g sample of the compound is decomposed,
16.07 g of pure zinc remains. Determine the percent composition of the
compound.

*Answer:*

If the compound contained only zinc and oxygen, and 16.07 grams was due
to the zinc, we can subtract to determine the mass of oxygen in the
original sample:

Mass of oxygen = 20.00 g – 16.07 g = 3.93 g O

Then, we divide the individual masses of each element by the total mass
of the sample to determine the percent (by mass) of each element in the
compound:

![& \\% \\ \\text{Zn} = \\frac{16.07 \\ \\text{g Zn}}{20.00 \\
\\text{g}} \\times 100\\% = 80.35\\% \\ \\text{Zn} \\\\\\& \\% \\
\\text{O} = \\frac{3.93 \\ \\text{g O}}{20.00 \\ \\text{g}} \\times
100\\% = 19.65\\% \\
\\text{O}](ck12_math_images_dir/911cd5e7c27e4e5d7ee142f3b3cf600a.png)

The calculations make sense because the sum of the two percentages adds
up to 100%. By mass, the compound is mostly zinc.

### Determining Masses from Percent Composition Data {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgTWFzc2VzIGZyb20gUGVyY2VudCBDb21wb3NpdGlvbiBEYXRh_2-ohj}

We can also perform the reverse calculation, determining the mass of an
element in a given sample, if we know the total mass of the sample and
its percent composition.

**Example 10.14**

You have a 10.0 g sample of a metal alloy that contains only aluminum
and zinc. If the sample is 36% aluminum by mass, what masses of Al and
Zn are present?

*Answer:*

We are told that the sample is 36% aluminum by mass. Because the only
other component is zinc, it must make up the remaining 64% of the mass.
We can multiply each of these percentages by 10.0 grams to find the
masses of each element.

10.0 g sample × 0.36 = 3.6 g Al

10.0 g sample × 0.64 = 6.4 g Zn

## Empirical Formulas {#10.html#x-ck12-RW1waXJpY2FsIEZvcm11bGFz_2-lfw}

Recall that an **empirical formula** is one that shows the lowest
whole-number ratio of the elements in a compound. Because the structure
of ionic compounds is an extended three-dimensional network of positive
and negative ions, only empirical formulas are used to describe ionic
compounds. However, we can also consider the empirical formula of a
molecular compound. Ethene is a small hydrocarbon compound with the
formula C ~2~ H ~4~ ( **Figure**
[below](#10.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMTAtMTUtRXRoZW5l) ). While C ~2~ H ~4~
is its molecular formula and represents its true molecular structure, it
has an empirical formula of CH ~2~ . The simplest ratio of carbon to
hydrogen in ethene is 1:2. In each molecule of ethene, there is 1 carbon
atom for every 2 atoms of hydrogen. Similarly, we can also say that in
one mole of ethene, there is 1 mole of carbon for every 2 moles of
hydrogen. The subscripts in a formula represent the molar ratio of the
elements in that compound.

<div
id="10.html#x-ck12-MTIwNjg2N2JhY2M0NjBjNWE1YmQzNzhiNzYyZDA2Njk.-m96"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-MW-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_10_files/20151009235237324064.png)

**Figure 10.5**

Ball-and-stick model of ethene, C ~2~ H ~4~ .

</div>

### Determining Percent Composition from a Chemical Formula {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgUGVyY2VudCBDb21wb3NpdGlvbiBmcm9tIGEgQ2hlbWljYWwgRm9ybXVsYQ.._2-dqw}

The percent composition of a compound can also be determined from its
chemical formula. The subscripts in the formula are first used to
calculate the mass of each element found in one mole of the compound.
That value is then divided by the molar mass of the compound and
multiplied by 100%.

<dl id="x-ck12-kt8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-rf2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-o9s">
<dd>
![\\% \\ \\text{by mass} = \\frac{\\text{mass of element in 1 mol of
compound}}{\\text{molar mass of compound}} \\times
100\\%](ck12_math_images_dir/0de3100542903f71a773e1e27d0679cf.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The percent composition of a given compound is always the same as long
as the compound is pure.

**Example 10.15**

Dichlorine heptoxide (Cl ~2~ O ~7~ ) is a highly reactive compound used
in some synthesis reactions. Calculate the percent composition of
dichlorine heptoxide.

*Answer:*

Determine the mass of each element in one mole of the compound, and find
the total molar mass of the compound:

-   mass of Cl in 1 mol Cl ~2~ O ~7~ = 2 x molar mass of Cl = 70.90 g
-   mass of O in 1 mol Cl ~2~ O ~7~ = 7 x molar mass of O = 112.00 g
-   molar mass of Cl ~2~ O ~7~ = 70.90 g/mol + 112.00 g/mol = 182.90
    g/mol

Now, calculate the percent by mass of each element by dividing the mass
of that element in 1 mole of the compound by the molar mass of the
compound and multiplying by 100%.

![&\\% \\ \\text{Cl} = \\frac{70.90 \\ \\text{g Cl}}{182.90 \\
\\text{g}} \\times 100\\% = 38.76\\% \\ \\text{Cl} \\\\\\&\\% \\
\\text{O} = \\frac{112.00 \\ \\text{g O}}{182.90 \\ \\text{g}} \\times
100\\% = 61.24\\% \\
\\text{O}](ck12_math_images_dir/369e145381548bccd3b7bf523b5f3030.png)

As expected, the percentages add up to 100%.

### Determining Empirical Formulas from Percent Composition {#10.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgRW1waXJpY2FsIEZvcm11bGFzIGZyb20gUGVyY2VudCBDb21wb3NpdGlvbg.._2-ajn}

A procedure called elemental analysis allows us to determine the
empirical formula of an unknown compound. Percent composition data can
be directly obtained with this technique, and these values can be used
to find the molar ratios of the elements, which gives us the empirical
formula. The steps to be taken are outlined below.

1.  Assume a 100 g sample of the compound so that the given percentages
    can be directly converted into grams.
2.  Use each element’s molar mass to convert the grams of each element
    to moles.
3.  In order to find a whole-number ratio, divide the moles of each
    element by the smallest value obtained in step 2.
4.  If all the values at this point are whole numbers (or very close),
    each number is equal to the subscript of the corresponding element
    in the empirical formula.
5.  In some cases, one or more of the values calculated in step 3 will
    not be whole numbers. Multiply each of them by the smallest number
    that will convert all values into whole numbers (or very close to
    whole numbers). Note that all values must be multiplied by the same
    number so that the relative ratios are not changed. These values can
    then be used to write the empirical formula.

**Example 10.16**

A compound of iron and oxygen is analyzed and found to contain 69.94%
iron and 30.06% oxygen by mass. Find the empirical formula of the
compound.

*Answer:*

Follow the steps outlined in the text.

1\. Assume a 100 g sample. In 100 grams of the compound, there would be
69.94 g Fe and 30.06 g O.

2\. Convert to moles.

![& 69.94 \\ \\text{g Fe} \\times \\frac{1 \\ \\text{mol Fe}}{55.85 \\
\\text{g Fe}} = 1.252 \\ \\text{mol Fe} \\\\\\& 30.06 \\ \\text{g O}
\\times \\frac{1 \\ \\text{mol O}}{16.00 \\ \\text{g O}} = 1.879 \\
\\text{mol
O}](ck12_math_images_dir/a866e9d57c173b08c9674fc6e338b6f6.png)

3\. Divide both values by the smallest of the results.

![& \\frac{1.252 \\ \\text{mol Fe}}{1.252} = 1 \\ \\text{mol Fe} \\\\\\&
\\frac{1.879 \\ \\text{mol O}}{1.252} = 1.501 \\ \\text{mol
O}](ck12_math_images_dir/ff71485124a90254476b26c904e57dd0.png)

4\. Since the moles of O is still not a whole number, both numbers can be
multiplied by 2. The results are now close enough to be rounded to the
nearest whole number.

![& 1 \\ \\text{mol Fe} \\times 2 = 2 \\ \\text{mol Fe} \\\\\\& 1.501 \\
\\text{mol O} \\times 2 = 3 \\ \\text{mol
O}](ck12_math_images_dir/418c1c9be85cfaeca0775a85082f829f.png)

The empirical formula of the compound is Fe ~2~ O ~3~ .

## Molecular Formulas {#10.html#x-ck12-TW9sZWN1bGFyIEZvcm11bGFz_2-yjl}

**Molecular formulas** tell us how many atoms of each element are
present in one molecule of a molecular compound. In many cases, the
molecular formula is the same as the empirical formula. For example, the
molecular formula of methane is CH ~4~ , and because 1:4 is the smallest
whole-number ratio that can be written for this compound, that is also
its empirical formula. Sometimes, however, the molecular formula is a
simple whole-number multiple of the empirical formula. Acetic acid is an
organic acid that gives vinegar its distinctive taste and smell. Its
molecular formula is C ~2~ H ~4~ O ~2~ . Glucose is a simple sugar that
cells use as their primary source of energy. Its molecular formula is C
~6~ H ~12~ O ~6~ . The structures of both molecules are shown in
**Figure**
[below](#10.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMTAtMTYtTW9sZWN1bGFyLWZvcm11bGFz) . They
are very different compounds, yet both have the same empirical formula,
CH ~2~ O.

<div
id="10.html#x-ck12-NTc3MmZjOGY4NDk4NmM1YzAzODFhYjNhMDJkMGZkMmI.-h96"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="(''left'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons); (''right'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons), User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetic-acid-2D-flat.png; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:D-glucose-chain-2D-Fischer.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_10_files/20151009235237471000.png)

**Figure 10.6**

Acetic acid ( *left* ) has a molecular formula of C ~2~ H ~4~ O ~2~ ,
while glucose ( *right* ) has a molecular formula of C ~6~ H ~12~ O ~6~
. Both have the empirical formula CH ~2~ O.

</div>

The following **Table** [below](#10.html#x-ck12-MTIuMg..) shows a few
other compounds with their empirical and molecular formulas:

  Compound            Empirical Formula   Molecular Formula
  ------------------- ------------------- -------------------
  water               H ~2~ O             H ~2~ O
  hydrogen peroxide   HO                  H ~2~ O ~2~
  methane             CH ~4~              CH ~4~
  butane              C ~2~ H ~5~         C ~4~ H ~10~

Empirical formulas can be determined from the percent composition of a
compound. In order to determine its molecular formula, it is necessary
to also know the molar mass of the compound. Chemists have various
methods to determine the molar mass of an unknown compound. In order to
go from the empirical formula to the molecular formula, follow these
steps:

1.  Calculate the empirical formula mass (EFM), which is simply the
    molar mass represented by the empirical formula.
2.  Divide the molar mass of the compound by the empirical formula mass.
    The result should be a whole number or very close to a whole number.
3.  Multiply all of the subscripts in the empirical formula by the whole
    number found in step 2. The result is the molecular formula.

**Example 10.17**

The empirical formula of a compound that contains boron and hydrogen is
BH ~3~ . Its molar mass is 27.7 g/mol. Determine the molecular formula
of the compound.

*Answer:*

Follow the steps outlined above.

1.  The empirical formula mass (EFM) = 13.84 g/mol
2.  ![\\dfrac{\\text{molar mass}}{\\text{EFM}} = \\dfrac{27.7}{13.84} =
    2](ck12_math_images_dir/0f9937109a71c8d3d8ca70a04a250903.png)
3.  BH ~3~ × 2 = B ~2~ H ~6~

The molecular formula of the compound is B ~2~ H ~6~ . The molar mass of
the molecular formula matches the molar mass of the compound.

You can watch a video lecture about molecular and empirical formulas at
[http://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/chemical-reactions-stoichiometry/v/molecular-and-empirical-formulas](molecular-and-empirical-formulas)
.

You can watch a video lecture about determining molecular and empirical
formulas from percent composition at
[http://www.khanacademy.org/science/physics/thermodynamics/v/molecular-and-empirical-forumlas-from-percent-composition](molecular-and-empirical-forumlas-from-percent-composition)
.

## Lesson Summary {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-nhl}

-   The percent composition of a compound is the percent by mass of each
    of the elements in the compound. It can be calculated from mass data
    or from the chemical formula.
-   Percent composition data can be used to determine a compound’s
    empirical formula, which is the molar ratio between the elements in
    the compound.
-   The empirical formula and the molar mass of a substance can be used
    to determine its molecular formula, which is the number of each kind
    of atom in a single molecule of the compound.

## Lesson Review Questions {#10.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-eyt}

1.  Calculate the percent carbon in C ~2~ H ~6~ .
2.  Calculate the percent nitrogen in CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ NH ~2~ .
3.  A sample of a given compound contains 13.18 g of carbon and 3.32 g
    of hydrogen. What is the percent composition of this compound?
4.  5.00 g of aluminum is reacted with 7.00 g of fluorine to form
    a compound. When the compound is isolated, its mass is found to be
    10.31 g, with 1.69 g of aluminum (and no fluorine) left unreacted.
    Determine the percent composition of the compound.
5.  Calculate the percent by mass of each element present in sodium
    sulfate (Na ~2~ SO ~4~ ).
6.  Vitamin C contains carbon (40.9%), hydrogen (4.6%), and
    oxygen (54.5%). Calculate the empirical formula for vitamin C. The
    molecular mass is about 180. Determine the molecular formula for
    vitamin C.
7.  Calculate the empirical formula of each compound from the
    percentages listed:
    1.  63.65% N, 36.35% O
    2.  81.68% C, 18.32% H

8.  A compound was analyzed and found to contain 13.5 g Ca, 10.8 g O,
    and 0.675 g H. What is the empirical formula of the compound?
9.  Calculate the percent composition of the following compounds:
    1.  magnesium fluoride, MgF ~2~
    2.  silver nitrate, AgNO ~3~

10. A compound with the empirical formula CH has a molar mass of
    78 g/mol. Determine its molecular formula.
11. A compound is found to consist of 43.64% phosphorus and
    56.36% oxygen. The molar mass of the compound is 284 g/mol. Find the
    molecular formula of the compound.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#10.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-pmb}

-   Dalton and relative weights:
    [http://dl.clackamas.edu/ch104-03/relative.htm](relative.htm)
-   Calculating formulas and composition:
    [http://library.thinkquest.org/10429/low/chemcomp/chemcomp.htm](chemcomp.htm)
-   Finding empirical formulas given percent composition:
    [http://www.chemteam.info/Mole/Emp-formula-given-percent-comp.html](Emp-formula-given-percent-comp.html)

## Points to Consider {#10.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-xyn}

In the next chapter we will be able to use this information to determine
how much material we need for a chemical reaction and how much product
we can produce as a result of a reaction.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686118] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#10.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-u3h}

1.  C. Sentier.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Avogadro\_Amedeo.jpg](File:Avogadro_Amedeo.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
3.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
4.  Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
5.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-MW-3D-balls.png](File:Ethylene-CRC-MW-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain
6.  (''left'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia
    Commons); (''right'') Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia
    Commons), User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetic-acid-2D-flat.png;
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:D-glucose-chain-2D-Fischer.png](File:D-glucose-chain-2D-Fischer.png) .
    Public Domain

<span id="11.html"></span>

# Chemical Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgUmVhY3Rpb25z-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_11_files/20151009235245928718.jpeg)
</span>

For millennia, humans have been fascinated with the composition of
things and the workings of the chemical world. Over time we have come to
understand that all matter is comprised of indivisible particles called
atoms. Our understanding of how matter works has been a long pursuit. It
started with figuring out how to make things burn. Humans have been
fascinated with chemical reactions that burn, explode, produce loud
bangs, and have brilliant colors. Early alchemists learned that throwing
certain salts on a fire would produce different “magical” colors.
Chinese alchemists created human kind’s first explosion with the
invention of gunpowder. This chemical recipe was eventually shared
across the medieval globe. Historically, humans have been fascinated
with coaxing nature into doing things, like burning. This fascination,
coupled with our ability to observe, record, and share, has led us to
our current understanding of matter. Our understanding of chemical
reactions and the equations that describe them are based on many years
of trial and error. The image above is an example of this. It is a star
shell bursting over the night sky. The technology of pyrotechnics, like
composition of the propellant, the explosive charge, the colors, and the
shapes of the burst, is a result of hundreds of years of intensive study
of chemical reactions and chemical equations. We are going to study
chemical reactions and chemical equations in this chapter.

^Jon\\ Sullivan.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Firework.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686120] -->

# Chemical Equations {#11.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgRXF1YXRpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-clj}

-   Give examples of historically significant chemical recipes
    and equations.
-   Briefly describe the major milestones that took place in developing
    the chemical recipe of gunpowder.
-   Understand mass relations between reactants and products for a given
    chemical process.
-   Be able to use stoichiometric coefficients in chemical equations.
-   Be able to balance chemical equations.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-cfk}

-   **stoichiometric coefficient** : The letters a, b, c, and d where A
    and B are reactants, and C and D are products. The stoichiometric
    coefficients indicate the relative amounts of reactants
    and products.
-   **balanced chemical equation** : An equation where the number of
    atoms of each element on the reactant side is equal to the number of
    atoms on the product side.

## Check Your Understanding {#11.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-w4m}

1.  Which of the following are physical changes and which are chemical
    changes?
    1.  melting of ice
    2.  a burning candle
    3.  melting of candle wax
    4.  sublimation of dry ice to CO ~2~ gas.

## Introduction {#11.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-aik}

Ever since the 9 ^th^ century, humans have been fascinated with the
nature of explosions. Whether to scare away evil spirits, to light up
the night sky in celebration, or to be used in warfare, our
understanding of gunpowder is based on our understanding of chemical
recipes. Our ability to modify, share, and replicate them has allowed us
to develop new recipes and to refine existing ones. Chemical reactions
can be described in terms of chemical equations. They are the foundation
of our modern day chemical recipes.

## Origins of Chemical Recipes: Gunpowder {#11.html#x-ck12-T3JpZ2lucyBvZiBDaGVtaWNhbCBSZWNpcGVzOiBHdW5wb3dkZXI.-k6r}

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-NGIzYTBjZGViNzVmOWUyNTQ0YmVmMzJmY2EwNWY3YWY.-shv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of NASA" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese_rocket.gif" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246067033.jpeg)

**Figure 11.1**

</div>

The first people to discover gunpowder were 9 ^th^ century Chinese
alchemists. This discovery was made by accident while they were creating
various chemical mixtures in pursuit of an elixir that would make them
immortal. The first formulation of gunpowder was a thick toffee made
from honey, saltpeter (a mixture composed primarily of potassium
nitrate), and sulfur. They hoped that eating it would help them live
forever. In reality, it burst into flames and burnt down their homes.

Over time, Chinese alchemists refined the recipe and began to develop
early pyrotechnic technology to help scare away evil spirits. A more
fully developed, and more explosive, formula called for 75 percent
potassium nitrate, 15 percent charcoal, and 10 percent sulfur.

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-ODBmNWVkYTAzY2NkNTEwZjQ1YWZhZjJkYzQyOGY2MWI.-erp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:PericlesofAthens/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese_Gunpowder_Formula.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246203919.jpeg)

**Figure 11.2**

</div>

### Medieval Europe {#11.html#x-ck12-TWVkaWV2YWwgRXVyb3Bl-0a9}

This recipe made its way to Europe in medieval times. A Franciscan friar
named Roger Bacon was particularly fascinated by the properties of
gunpowder. He discovered that a key factor in the energetics of the
mixture was the purity of the saltpeter. Bacon was responsible for
developing early crystallization techniques to purify the mixture. He
also discovered that the more tightly packed the powder, the larger the
explosion.

Bacon feared that bad things could happen if the mixture ended up in the
wrong hands. He encoded the recipe in an anagram, which read (when
translated from the original Latin) *“And so thou wilt call up thunder
and destruction if thou know the art.”* The secret recipe, however, did
not stay secret for long.

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-NWRmYTg5MzBkNWYwNjY4YTQ3OWVkNTI2NWU0OTY4MGY.-lbu"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joseph Wright" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:JosephWright-Alchemist.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246321322.jpeg)

**Figure 11.3**

</div>

Pyrotechnics, or fireworks, used in events recorded in 14 ^th^ century
Italy show that the recipe was no longer a secret. During the 15 ^th^
and 16 ^th^ centuries, the Italians continued refining the art of
pyrotechnics. Then, in 1830, a major leap forward in gunpowder
technology occurred. It was discovered that replacing potassium nitrate
with potassium chlorate resulted in a more energetic mixture, and so the
recipe was revised once again.

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-ZjVjYTJlZDA2Nzk2MDA5ZTE4ZTVhMDliODE2ZTMyMGI.-azk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Oliver H." -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spk-RZ.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246422997.jpeg)

**Figure 11.4**

</div>

The modern day formulation of gun powder is called black powder. It is
still commonly used today. Its formulation is still quite similar to
what was used in 9 ^th^ century China. Black powder is considered a low
explosive. It is a mixture that burns quickly, but the resulting shock
wave travels at subsonic speeds. The speed at which it burns is
dependent on the accessibility of oxygen atoms to the carbon source. In
contrast, high explosives like nitroglycerin detonate instead of
burning, creating shock waves that are supersonic (faster than the speed
of sound).

## The Chemical Equation {#11.html#x-ck12-VGhlIENoZW1pY2FsIEVxdWF0aW9u-poe}

Chemical equations describe the changes in composition that take place
during a chemical reaction. Along with the identities of the starting
reactants and the final products, chemical equations show the ratios in
which these substances are consumed and produced. The reaction of iron
with oxygen to form iron(III) oxide is shown in the **Figure**
[below](#11.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTEtMDctR3JpbmRlcg..) .

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-NDI3ZWZjMWU0ZDNmODUxZmI5OTg0MzU0OGQxODU1MjQ.-czp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jared Tarbel" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/generated/5554654375/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246548317.jpeg)

**Figure 11.5**

The sparks from a steel grinder are molten iron. The iron reacts with
oxygen to form iron(III) oxide.

</div>

We can describe this reaction with a chemical equation:

![4\\text{Fe}\_{(s)}+3\\text{O}\_{2(g)}\\rightarrow
2\\text{Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_{3(s)}](ck12_math_images_dir/5f81034b4c7ecb05350897eb0a30a974.png)

This equation is said to be balanced, because the amount of each element
expressed on the reactants side is equal to the amounts expressed on the
products side. This is shown more explicitly in the following **Table**
[below](#11.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6RmVTYW1wbGU.) .

                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  Fe                       4                        4
  O                        6                        6

  :  4Fe

Often times, the processes described by chemical equations do not
represent a single reaction. For example, the following equation shows
the starting materials and the products for photosynthesis:

![6\\text{CO}\_{2(g)}+6\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}\_{(l)}
\\overset{light}{\\rightarrow}
\\text{C}\_6\\text{H}\_{12}\\text{O}\_{6(s)}+6\\text{O}\_{2(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/5fa261ff5f834020b8c98797decedb61.png)

This process does not occur in a single step. A sequence of many
individual reactions is required to make glucose and oxygen gas out of
carbon dioxide and water. Chemical equations can be used to represent
individual reactions or the net change that occurs after multiple
sequential chemical processes.

### The Balanced Chemical Equation {#11.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEJhbGFuY2VkIENoZW1pY2FsIEVxdWF0aW9u-7sp}

We can describe chemical reactions in terms of generic expressions like
the following equation:

![aA+bB\\rightarrow
cC+dD](ck12_math_images_dir/376085c1abc6df550d28988d2de97761.png)

where *A* and *B* are reactants, and *C* and *D* are products. The
letters *a* , *b* , *c* , and *d* represent **stoichiometric
coefficients** , or the relative amount of each substance that is
involved in the reaction. In this particular reaction, there are two
reactants and two products, but others might have more or less. For
example, the equation describing the rusting of iron had two reactants
(Fe and O ~2~ ) and one product (Fe ~2~ O ~3~ ).

In a **balanced chemical equation** , the number of atoms of each
element on the reactant side is equal to the number of atoms on the
product side. This is necessary for all chemical equations, due to the
law of conservation of mass. Atoms are neither created nor destroyed
during a chemical reaction, only rearranged. Here are some examples of
general expressions that will be applied to specific reactions in the
next section.

**Example 11.1**

Substance A reacts with substance B to form substance AB. Write the
balanced chemical equation for this process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-ouz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-cnx">
<dd>
*Write the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![A+B\\rightarrow
AB](ck12_math_images_dir/375fb57ec7ecde2bf7bbd71a71c62830.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-Njg5YjFlM2JkYWUwOWNiM2NmNTFkMTg2OTc3OWVhOTA.-8nt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Njg5YjFlM2JkYWUwOWNiM2NmNTFkMTg2OTc3OWVhOTA.-wyp">
<dd>
*Balance (it already is).*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  A                        1                        1
  B                        1                        1

  :  A + B → AB

**Example 11.2**

Substance A reacts with substance B ~2~ to form substance AB. Write the
balanced chemical equation for this process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-a0s">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-mqw">
<dd>
*Write the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![A+B\_2\\rightarrow
AB](ck12_math_images_dir/b7038476c90c2be984043f569816c2d6.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-gyd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-djj">
<dd>
*Balance.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![2A+B\_2\\rightarrow
2AB](ck12_math_images_dir/ff6cb35d35cdf2d75c479451c2d164e9.png)

                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  A                        2                        2
  B                        2                        2

**Example 11.3**

Substance A ~2~ reacts with substance B ~2~ to form substance AB ~3~ .
Write the balanced chemical equation for this process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-rmz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-kpt">
<dd>
*Write the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![A\_2+B\_2\\rightarrow
AB\_3](ck12_math_images_dir/ad71812b79c856723f2aca389b8a59d5.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-ahl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-afn">
<dd>
*Balance.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  A                        2                        2
  B                        6                        6

  :  A

### Balancing Chemical Equations for Real Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-QmFsYW5jaW5nIENoZW1pY2FsIEVxdWF0aW9ucyBmb3IgUmVhbCBSZWFjdGlvbnM.-rgo}

Now that we have studied the general process for describing and
balancing chemical equations, we are going to apply this approach to
examples that include actual chemicals. As we present the following
reactions, we are going to focus only on the changes in composition from
reactants to products. In later chapters, we will look at other reaction
properties, such as states of matter, temperature, and the energy lost
or gained by a given reaction. In the following lesson, we will look at
ways to classify different types of reactions. This knowledge will allow
us to make reasonable predictions about the products that might be
generated from a given set of reactants.

**Tips for Balancing Equations**

Before we get started with balancing chemical equations, here are some
simple tips to consider:

1.  If there are polyatomic ions that exist unchanged on both sides of
    the equation, it is often simpler to treat them as single units than
    to break them down into their individual elements.
2.  It is often easier to leave elements that occur in their pure
    elemental form (on either side of the equation) for last.
3.  If a reactant or product has a coefficient of 1, this number is not
    explicitly written.
4.  In a correctly balanced equation, all coefficients must be
    whole numbers. However, the use of fractions can be helpful as a way
    of finding the correct coefficients. If all atoms in an equation are
    balanced but some have fractional coefficients, multiply all
    coefficients in the entire equation (including those not
    explicitly written!) by the lowest common denominator to get the
    final balanced equation.

**Example 11.4**

Liquid mercury is heated in the presence of oxygen to produce
mercury(II) oxide. Write the balanced chemical equation for this
process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-ODlhZTg4YTM1ZTAzZmIwYTJkYjUxM2IxYjk5YmJkN2Q.-q7j">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODlhZTg4YTM1ZTAzZmIwYTJkYjUxM2IxYjk5YmJkN2Q.-0xm">
<dd>
*Start by writing the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![\\text{Hg}(l) +\\text{O}\_{2}(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{HgO}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/4886b3931ae3159dbc984e1c77ba8701.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-ZDIxNWU2MDMwZDFhMTliOTAyMDI5ZTRkYjIwZGY5MGI.-qmu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDIxNWU2MDMwZDFhMTliOTAyMDI5ZTRkYjIwZGY5MGI.-bre">
<dd>
*Then, alter the coefficients to balance each element.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  Hg                       2                        2
  O                        2                        2

  :  2Hg(l)+O

Notice that in this example, the formula for oxygen is the diatomic form
O ~2~ . Many pure nonmetallic elements are unstable as individual atoms
and combine readily to make diatomic molecules. Hydrogen (H ~2~ ),
nitrogen (N ~2~ ), oxygen (O ~2~ ), and the halogens (F ~2~ , Cl ~2~ ,
Br ~2~ , and I ~2~ ) exist as diatomic molecules when in their pure
elemental forms.

**Example 11.5**

Hydrogen gas and fluorine gas react to form hydrogen fluoride gas. Write
the balanced chemical equation for this process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-ODlhZTg4YTM1ZTAzZmIwYTJkYjUxM2IxYjk5YmJkN2Q.-tbl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODlhZTg4YTM1ZTAzZmIwYTJkYjUxM2IxYjk5YmJkN2Q.-cmo">
<dd>
*Start by writing the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![\\text{H}\_{2}(g)+\\text{F}\_{2}(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{HF}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/ea72c156b0c2e16772d05cac331ab1e3.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-NDQ4YTQ5NmIyYjJmYmIyOTkyODcyNjVmMzU1NDUyM2M.-nlw">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQ4YTQ5NmIyYjJmYmIyOTkyODcyNjVmMzU1NDUyM2M.-txn">
<dd>
*Then balance each element.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  H                        2                        2
  F                        2                        2

  :  H

Again, pure hydrogen and fluorine exist as diatomic gases.

**Example 11.6**

Ammonium nitrate decomposes to form nitrogen gas, water, and oxygen gas.
Write the balanced chemical equation for this process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-xsr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-9od">
<dd>
*Write the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![\\text{NH}\_4\\text{NO}\_{3}(s) \\rightarrow
\\text{N}\_{2}(g)+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)+\\text{O}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/43f9a582f74af42a54b8e8823fcaaa13.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-s72">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-3k5">
<dd>
*Balance.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because this equation involves more than two elements, it is slightly
less straightforward to balance. Since nitrogen and oxygen both occur in
their pure elemental forms, we start by balancing hydrogen:

![\\text{NH}\_4\\text{NO}\_{3}(s) \\rightarrow
\\text{N}\_{2}(g)+2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)+\\text{O}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/14e326a38ab7be4311ce3822fadf2be7.png)

Hydrogen and nitrogen are now balanced, but oxygen is not. This can be
fixed by changing the coefficient on its pure elemental form:

![\\text{NH}\_4\\text{NO}\_{3}(s) \\rightarrow
\\text{N}\_{2}(g)+2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)+\\frac{1}{2}\\text{O}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/15ef0e66302d23e54c890dd245c8b7b3.png)

The atoms are now balanced, but to avoid having fractional coefficients,
we must multiply all coefficients in the equation by 2:

![2\\text{NH}\_4\\text{NO}\_{3}(s) \\rightarrow
2\\text{N}\_{2}(g)+4\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)+\\text{O}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/02095137b4fbcaa2a0cf1bf4315cf72c.png)

We can confirm that this equation is balanced by writing the following
**Table** [below](#11.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6RXgxMS42) .

                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  N                        4                        4
  H                        8                        8
  O                        6                        6

  :  2NH

**Example 11.7**

Lead(II) nitrate reacts with sodium chloride to form lead(II) chloride
and sodium nitrate. Write the balanced chemical equation for this
process.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-k8j">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTY2NzlkOGMyNWZkYTJiZjMwM2VmYjhkZWFiYmFlMzY.-1lz">
<dd>
*Write the general expression.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
![\\text{Pb}(\\text{NO}\_3)\_2+\\text{NaCl} \\rightarrow
\\text{PbCl}\_2+\\text{NaNO}\_3](ck12_math_images_dir/8c4ff219a66b2b23002dd7e4869403d2.png)

<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-3ns">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTlhODA4ZDhkMTYxMjJkNzBlNDRiZDdmNzA5ZDMwZmI.-f8c">
<dd>
*Balance.*

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                           Reactants                Products
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  Pb                       1                        1
  NO ~3~                   2                        2
  Na                       2                        2
  Cl                       2                        2

  :  Pb(NO

By keeping the polyatomic nitrate ion intact as a single unit, balancing
this equation becomes somewhat simpler. This was done because the ion
exists unchanged on both sides of the equation. Note that this is in
contrast to the previous example, in which the nitrate ion decomposed to
form other substances.

## Lesson Summary {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-byr}

-   The composition of gunpowder gradually changed as alchemists and
    scientists experimented with ways to make it even more explosive.
-   Chemical reactions are described using chemical equations.
-   Stoichiometric coefficients are used in chemical equations to
    indicate the amounts of reactants and products.
-   Because of the law of conservation of mass (matter can neither be
    created nor destroyed through chemical reactions), chemical
    equations must have equal amounts of each specific atom on both
    sides of the equation.

## Lesson Review Questions {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-jcy}

1.  Early Chinese alchemists discovered an early form of gunpowder. What
    was the composition of this substance?
2.  What later developments were made to the gunpowder recipe that
    improved its pyrotechnic properties?
3.  Make an argument for why the burning of a candle is consistent with
    the law of conservation of matter/mass.
4.  Think of an experiment that you could conduct to demonstrate that
    mass is conserved for a given chemical change.
5.  Balance the following chemical equations:
    1.  ![\\text{C}+\\text{O}\_2 \\rightarrow
        \\text{CO}](ck12_math_images_dir/e8ad02ad56060ec46b64060813bea31e.png)
    2.  ![\\text{CO}+\\text{O}\_2 \\rightarrow
        \\text{CO}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/b6e505f49b3a82116ef5eb93908cbd0b.png)
    3.  ![\\text{H}\_2+\\text{Br}\_2 \\rightarrow
        \\text{HBr}](ck12_math_images_dir/964e23cdfb6e4965dc54e291f4197d12.png)
    4.  ![\\text{K}+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O} \\rightarrow
        \\text{KOH}+\\text{H}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/7b15e5dd5f9dca30383c716376acd82e.png)
    5.  ![\\text{O}\_3 \\rightarrow
        \\text{O}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/4fa648b84ee128aa3639fb39ede5198b.png)
    6.  ![\\text{N}\_2+\\text{H}\_2 \\rightarrow
        \\text{NH}\_3](ck12_math_images_dir/0ea48b68b9909effcf6c68ce4c7dbec2.png)
    7.  ![\\text{Zn}+\\text{AgCl} \\rightarrow
        \\text{ZnCl}\_2+\\text{Ag}](ck12_math_images_dir/207e0e145d7263260f85224a35c0b3de.png)
    8.  ![\\text{Cl}\_2+\\text{NaI} \\rightarrow
        \\text{NaCl}+\\text{I}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/ec2417ed19a67bf07ae35267df877c8e.png)
    9.  ![\\text{P}\_4\\text{O}\_{10}+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O} \\rightarrow
        \\text{H}\_3\\text{PO}\_4](ck12_math_images_dir/ff2747bd31c05cc3ec84535f5df02981.png)
    10. ![\\text{Be}\_2\\text{C}+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O} \\rightarrow
        \\text{Be}(\\text{OH})\_2+\\text{CH}\_4](ck12_math_images_dir/7ef10e5b6a8eaf9aa495bedf220e6398.png)
    11. ![\\text{S}+\\text{HNO}\_3 \\rightarrow
        \\text{H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4+\\text{NO}\_2+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}](ck12_math_images_dir/14a8eaeb63de36e98f8d333811a3939e.png)
    12. ![\\text{NH}\_3+\\text{CuO} \\rightarrow
        \\text{Cu}+\\text{N}\_2+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}](ck12_math_images_dir/25c0ceda50527408e095744ed5735841.png)
    13. ![\\text{HCl}+\\text{CaCO}\_3 \\rightarrow
        \\text{CaCl}\_2+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}+\\text{CO}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/b26bc2d6a27751a7d780546c14f2c6ab.png)

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#11.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-i39}

-   Youtube Video of Kaboom! The Sizzling Story of Explosions:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CShA52EKY80](watch?v=CShA52EKY80)
-   Gunpowder in Ancient China:
    [http://www.historyforkids.org/learn/war/gunpowder.htm](gunpowder.htm)
-   Practice Balancing Chemical Equations:
    -   [http://education.jlab.org/elementbalancing/index.html](index.html)
    -   [http://www.files.chem.vt.edu/RVGS/ACT/notes/scripts/bal\_eq1.html](bal_eq1.html)
    -   [http://gregthatcher.org/Chemistry/BalanceEquation/S](S)
-   Chemical Equation Balances:
    [http://www.personal.psu.edu/jzl157/balance.htm](balance.htm)

## Points to Consider {#11.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-zlk}

-   What is the relationship between chemical equations and chemical
    reactions?
-   In this chapter, an argument was made that the human fascination
    with fire and explosions ultimately contributed to our current
    understanding of chemical equations. Can you think of other aspects
    of nature for which further exploration has contributed to our
    current understanding of chemistry?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686120] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686121] -->

# Types of Chemical Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-VHlwZXMgb2YgQ2hlbWljYWwgUmVhY3Rpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-vqn}

-   Be able to classify a chemical reaction as a combination,
    decomposition, single replacement, double replacement, or
    combustion reaction.
-   Be able to predict the products when given a set of reactants for a
    given chemical process.
-   Explain the concept of solubility and the process of precipitation.
-   Use solubility information to predict whether or not a given
    substance is soluble in water.
-   Use the general solubility rules to predict chemical behavior.
-   Be able to write molecular, ionic, and net ionic equations for a
    given chemical process.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-ag8}

-   **combination reaction** : A reaction where two or more chemical
    species combine to produce a single new compound.
-   **decomposition reaction** : A reaction where a single chemical
    species breaks down to produce two or more new chemical species.
-   **single replacement reaction** : Occurs when one chemical species
    (often a single element) replaces a portion of another compound to
    produce two new products.
-   **double replacement reaction** : Occurs when the cations from the
    original two ionic compounds trade anions to make two new
    ionic compounds.
-   **molecular equation** : An equation that shows all ionic components
    as neutral compounds, but the ones that are dissolved in water are
    denoted with "(aq)."
-   **ionic equation** : A chemical equation in which the various
    reaction components are represented as they actually exist in the
    reaction, for example, as individual ions.
-   **spectator ion** : Ions that are present in solution but do not
    participate in the overall reaction.
-   **net ionic equation** : The simplified ionic equation in which all
    of the spectator ions are cancelled out.
-   **combustion** : Occurs when a hydrocarbon reacts in the presence of
    oxygen to produce water and carbon dioxide.

## Check Your Understanding {#11.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-ao0}

Study the **Figure**
[below](#11.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTEtMDktU3RlZWwtV29vbA..) , which
depicts the mass change that occurs when steel wool burns in air.

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-ZTUxYzlmODlmOGQwNTQwNGM5OGZmYjg4ODlkNTBkYzQ.-p3j"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246663277.png)

**Figure 11.6**

Mass changes for steel wool burning in air

</div>

1.  What happens to the mass of the steel wool as the reaction proceeds?
2.  Given that mass must be conserved in chemical reactions (it cannot
    come from nowhere), what might be your explanation for the change in
    the mass of the steel wool?
3.  How might mass changes such as this help us identify and categorize
    a given chemical process?

## Introduction {#11.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-1yy}

[![](ck12_11_files/tmpk097P0.jpeg)](_Y1alDuXm6A%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3De68d24a88ae869d28bd8ed7242ab7026)

Click on the image above for more content

The video above at
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_Y1alDuXm6A](watch?v=_Y1alDuXm6A)
(1:12) shows the decomposition of mercury(II) oxide into liquid mercury
and oxygen gas. This reaction was an important one in the history of
chemistry, because it helped early chemists to understand the
relationship between reactants and products.

In the last lesson, we began investigating how a chemical equation can
represent a given chemical reaction. In this lesson, we are going to
study the ways in which chemical reactions are classified. There are
literally thousands of chemical reactions that take place every day in
our lives. Some reactions take place in the atmosphere, such as the
combustion of fossil fuels. Others occur in solution, like the reactions
responsible for photosynthesis or the reactions that break down our food
to give us energy. Chemical reactions can take place in a variety of
environments. Reactions happen on the sea floor, in our cells, and in
the upper atmosphere. As we look at chemical reactions, we notice some
commonalities and trends. When we studied the elements, we saw
characteristics that allowed us to categorize them by family. There are
also various ways to categorize chemical reactions. Some reactions
produce heat, while others consume it. Some reactions are spontaneous,
while others are not. Some reactions happen in nanoseconds, while others
happen over longer spans of time. Some produce electricity, some emit
light, and some release gaseous products. The products of chemical
reactions tell us a lot about the chemistry of the process. In the above
video, we see mercury(II) oxide decomposing into elemental mercury and
oxygen gas. Decomposition was one of the first reaction types to be
identified by chemists. Decomposition is one type of reaction you'll
learn about in this lesson.

## Combination Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-Q29tYmluYXRpb24gUmVhY3Rpb25z_1-fbi}

The first type of reaction that we will investigate is the **combination
reaction** , which is sometimes also referred to as a synthesis
reaction. In combination reactions, two or more chemical species combine
to produce a single new compound. A generic combination reaction might
have the following form:

![A+B \\rightarrow
C](ck12_math_images_dir/314d7657b5366c88253b3b56b1b0b4e4.png)

Substances in all states of matter can participate in combination
reactions. For example, oxygen in the air can react with iron to produce
rust. Rusting is a common occurrence, especially in regions of the world
where precipitation is relatively high. Although rust tends to be a
mixture of compounds, its primary component is iron(III) oxide (Fe ~2~ O
~3~ ). Rusting is generally a very slow process, but when the iron has a
very high surface area, as in the case of steel wool, it can happen at a
much faster rate, as shown in the following video:

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5MDH92VxPEQ](watch?v=5MDH92VxPEQ)

[![](ck12_11_files/tmpSKg2F0.jpeg)](5MDH92VxPEQ%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D2b828a6258c8491147b087f4b489ff31)

Click on the image above for more content

The balanced chemical equation for this process is shown below:

![4\\text{Fe}(s)+3\\text{O}\_{2}(g) \\rightarrow
2\\text{Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_{3}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/04129b043d69601d10b044f01c4fbd39.png)

## Decomposition Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-RGVjb21wb3NpdGlvbiBSZWFjdGlvbnM._1-jci}

A decomposition reaction is the exact opposite of a combination
reaction. In decomposition reactions, a single chemical species breaks
down to produce two or more new chemical species. A generic
decomposition reaction might take the following form:

![C \\rightarrow
A+B](ck12_math_images_dir/f4eb2a59c310fd8237b695e70e2d4539.png)

Again, substances in all states of matter commonly participate in
decomposition reactions. For example, hydrogen peroxide will decompose
over time to produce water and oxygen gas according to the following
equation:

![2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}\_{2}(l) \\rightarrow
2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)+\\text{O}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/4984d1bc5dbc669724267d5594cf598d.png)

Another common type of decomposition reaction involves the process of
electrolysis, in which an electrical current is passed through a
substance to break apart a compound. One example of a decomposition
reaction requiring the use of electrolysis is the decomposition of
molten sodium chloride, as shown by the following equation:

![2\\text{NaCl}(s) \\rightarrow
2\\text{Na}(s)+\\text{Cl}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/0586c5d242d02d4c0d957e5f3a85fc18.png)

## Single Replacement Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-U2luZ2xlIFJlcGxhY2VtZW50IFJlYWN0aW9ucw.._1-los}

A **single replacement reaction** (sometimes called a single
displacement reaction) occurs when one chemical species (often a single
element) replaces a portion of another compound to produce two new
products. The general form of a single replacement reaction is shown
below:

![AB+C \\rightarrow
AC+B](ck12_math_images_dir/47b23bcbdc2555db68b0a520c74eaa21.png)

Two common types of single replacement reactions involve pure metals
reaction with aqueous solutions of either an acid or an ionic compound.
When a reactive metal is placed in an acid solution, the following
reaction is likely to occur:

**Metal + acid → ionic solution + hydrogen gas**

An example of this would be the reaction between zinc and hydrochloric
acid, which produces zinc chloride and hydrogen gas. Here is an image of
this reaction:

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-Zjg3ZTNmM2ZiNzkyODBiZDI4ZThhZWU3ZGE1YTU2N2U.-s5c"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn_reaction_with_HCl.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246782457.jpeg)

**Figure 11.7**

Zinc metal reacting with a solution of hydrochloric acid

</div>

The balanced chemical equation for this single replacement reaction is
shown below:

![\\text{Zn}(s)+2\\text{HCl}(aq) \\rightarrow
\\text{ZnCl}\_{2}(aq)+\\text{H}\_{2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/4b6de5df488dc503a229a9d6e6fe8ec2.png)

Another type of single replacement reaction involves a solid metal
replacing the metal cation in an ionic compound that has been dissolved
in water. If the solid metal is more reactive than the dissolved metal
cations, the following type of reaction can occur:

**Metal + ionic solution → different metal + different ionic solution**

A common example of this reaction is when iron is replaced by the more
reactive zinc metal. The balanced chemical equation for this process is
shown below.

![\\text{Zn}(s)+\\text{FeSO}\_{4}(aq) \\rightarrow
\\text{Fe}(s)+\\text{ZnSO}\_{4}(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/b79ad80644894740a78b658ed63fbef9.png)

## Double Replacement Reactions {#11.html#x-ck12-RG91YmxlIFJlcGxhY2VtZW50IFJlYWN0aW9ucw.._1-hj7}

Double replacement reactions typically include two water-soluble salts
that react with one another in solution. The general form of a double
replacement reaction would look something like the following:

![AB+CD \\rightarrow
AD+CB](ck12_math_images_dir/e12566a10153358930280c113e916677.png)

In **double replacement reactions** , the cations from the original two
ionic compounds trade anions to make two new ionic compounds. In
general, at least one of the new compounds must precipitate (form an
insoluble solid) for us to conclude that a reaction has occurred. An
example of such a process is shown below with the double replacement
reaction between solutions of potassium iodide and lead(II) nitrate.

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-MjhlYzcxMTFmOGUzYzhlODIxOGQzOTNhZDU5MDIwNmQ.-6o4"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Der Kreole" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lluvia_de_oro.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235246898216.jpeg)

**Figure 11.8**

A double replacement reaction is used to form lead(II) iodide. The
reactants shown here are colorless solutions of potassium iodide and
potassium nitrate. When combined, these produce a yellow precipitate of
lead(II) iodide.

</div>

At the molecular level, our model for the way in which a precipitate
forms can be described in an animation:

[http://www.crescent.edu.sg/crezlab/webpages/PptReaction\_PbI2.htm](PptReaction_PbI2.htm)

### Representing Ionic Reactions as Chemical Equations {#11.html#x-ck12-UmVwcmVzZW50aW5nIElvbmljIFJlYWN0aW9ucyBhcyBDaGVtaWNhbCBFcXVhdGlvbnM._1-z2s}

For reactions that involve ions dissolved in water, there are several
different ways to express the overall process as a chemical equation.
For example, the overall **molecular equation** shows all ionic
components as neutral compounds, but the ones that are dissolved in
water are denoted with "(aq)." Note that the ionic substances do not
exist as molecules, but we write them out as though they were. In the
following example, two water-soluble compounds trade partners to produce
one dissolved ionic compound and one solid precipitate:

![AB(aq)+CD(aq) \\rightarrow
AD(aq)+CB(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/462163ad6764ef552688eb445d93eb31.png)

In reality, the aqueous substances do not exist as molecules or ionic
crystal lattices. Instead, the individual ions are dissolved and
distributed throughout the solution. If the reaction above were written
as an **ionic equation** , it would look something like the following:

![A\^+(aq)+B\^-(aq)+C\^+(aq)+D\^-(aq) \\rightarrow
A\^+(aq)+D\^-(aq)+CB(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/2c9453859e74a53005cdb5c4664ce0aa.png)

In this example, the various reaction components are presented in a form
that is closer to the way they actually exist during the reaction. The
aqueous components are separated into ions, and the precipitate is found
as a combined solid. We are assuming in this example that A and C form
cations with a charge of 1+, while B and D form anions with a charge of
1-. In real examples, we would look at which group each element is found
in on the periodic table to determine its likely charge.

Notice that in the ionic equation, *A ^+^* and *D ^-^* were unchanged
over the course of the reaction; they exist as aqueous ions on both the
reactant and product sides. In other words, these species did not
experience any net change. Ions that are present in solution but do not
participate in the overall reaction are known as **spectator ions** .
The ionic equation can be simplified to the **net ionic equation** by
canceling out all the spectator ions.

![\\cancel{A\^+(aq)}+B\^-(aq)+C\^+(aq)+\\cancel{D\^-(aq)} & \\rightarrow
\\cancel{A\^+(aq)}+\\cancel{D\^-(aq)}+CB(s) \\\\\\B\^-(aq)+C\^+(aq) &
\\rightarrow
CB(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/dda315e1695157a48cda23e009d3a223.png)

Let's look at these three types of equations again using a real example.
If we were to mix aqueous solutions of potassium iodide and lead(II)
nitrate, lead(II) iodide would precipitate as a solid, and potassium
nitrate would remain dissolved. This can be represented by any of the
three following equations:

**Molecular Equation**

![2\\text{KI}(aq)+\\text{Pb}(\\text{NO}\_3)\_{2}(aq) \\rightarrow
2\\text{KNO}\_{3}(aq)+\\text{PbI}\_{2}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/8d56935d606053dbb622bae08e257eee.png)

**Ionic Equation**

![2\\text{K}\^+(aq)+2\\text{I}\^-(aq)+\\text{Pb}\^{2+}(aq)+2\\text{NO}\^-\_{3}(aq)
\\rightarrow
2\\text{K}\^+(aq)+2\\text{NO}\^-\_{3}(aq)+\\text{PbI}\_{2}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/2a5e8b48e8049315bdca66efb0985eac.png)

**Net Ionic Equation**

![\\text{Pb}\^{2+}(aq)+2\\text{I}\^-(aq) \\rightarrow
\\text{PbI}\_{2}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/3f4283c68e4408b1319fa92fa9ed5fcf.png)

### Predicting Solubility of Ionic Compounds {#11.html#x-ck12-UHJlZGljdGluZyBTb2x1YmlsaXR5IG9mIElvbmljIENvbXBvdW5kcw.._1-7ux}

How do we determine which ions are likely to form an insoluble
precipitate and which will remain dissolved in water? By combining
various ionic solutions, chemists have come up with some general
guidelines for whether a given cation-anion pairing is likely to be
soluble or insoluble in water. It should be noted that such an approach
is an oversimplification. Each compound has its own solubility value, so
two "soluble" compounds might have very different abilities to dissolve
in water. Additionally, even "insoluble" salts can dissolve in water to
a very limited extent. We will take a more quantitative approach to
solubility in the chapter on solutions. However, qualitative rules like
the ones in the **Table**
[below](#11.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6c29sdWJpbGl0eQ..) are useful for
predicting whether a precipitate is likely to form when combining
moderate amounts of specific cations and anions.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Type of Particle         Soluble                  Insoluble
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  Common Cations           Alkali metal cation (Li  
                           ^+^ , Na ^+^ , K ^+^ ,   
                           Rb ^+^ , or Cs ^+^ ) or  
                           the NH ~4~ ^+^ cation    

  Common Anions            ClO ~4~ ^-^ and NO ~3~   
                           ^-^ compounds            

  Halides                  Most Cl ^-^ , Br ^-^ ,   Compounds that include
                           and I ^-^ compounds      the Ag ^+^ , Pb ^2+^ ,
                                                    or Hg ~2~ ^2+^ cations

  Sulfates                 Most SO ~4~ ^2-^         PbSO ~4~ , Ag ~2~ SO ~4~
                           compounds                , Hg ~2~ SO ~4~ , CaSO
                                                    ~4~ , SrSO ~4~ , and
                                                    BaSO ~4~

  Sulfides                 Compounds with NH ~4~    Most S ^2-^ compounds
                           ^+^ or a metal from      
                           group IA or IIA as       
                           cation                   

  Hydroxides               Compounds with NH ~4~    Most OH ^-^ compounds
                           ^+^ , Ba ^2+^ , or a     
                           metal from group IA as   
                           cation                   

  Carbonates, phosphates,  Compounds with NH ~4~    Most CO ~3~ ^2-^ and PO
  and sulfites             ^+^ or a metal from      ~4~ ^3-^ , and SO ~3~
                           group IA as cation       ^2-^ compounds
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

  :  Solubility Properties to Predict Products of Chemical Reactions

## Combustion {#11.html#x-ck12-Q29tYnVzdGlvbg.._1-txw}

**Combustion** occurs when a hydrocarbon reacts in the presence of
oxygen to produce water and carbon dioxide. These reactions are very
exothermic, which means that they produce a large amount of heat.
Combustion reactions are quite common in our everyday lives, such as the
burning of gasoline to fuel a car. The chemical equation for a
combustion reaction has the following generic form:

![\\text{C}\_{x}\\text{H}\_{y}+\\text{O}\_2 \\rightarrow
\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}+\\text{CO}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/9b6ec2f1956d50d072114ba627dc66f2.png)

<div
id="11.html#x-ck12-ZDYzOTJlNWVhZTk0MzU0NDAwZTY5NWZhNzFhMGI2ZjM.-hgj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Flickr:webhamster" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/26316553@N07/2897369014/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_11_files/20151009235247023476.jpeg)

**Figure 11.9**

Combustion reaction of a marshmallow (sucrose) and wood (cellulose).

</div>

The process of cellular respiration can be thought of as a highly
controlled version of a combustion reaction. We do not literally burn
hydrocarbons in our body, but the overall reactants and products are the
same. Hydrocarbons, such as sucrose (C ~12~ H ~22~ O ~11~ ), are
combined with oxygen in a series of enzymatic steps to product water,
carbon dioxide, and energy, which is stored in the form of reactive
molecules. The unbalanced chemical equation for this overall process is
shown below:

![\\text{C}\_{12}\\text{H}\_{22}\\text{O}\_{11}+\\text{O}\_2
\\rightarrow
\\text{CO}\_2+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}](ck12_math_images_dir/fee29494c5d0e27ed4fee5bbcc097c00.png)

## Lesson Summary {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-ykd}

-   Combination reactions occur when two or more reactants combine to
    produce a single compound.
-   Decomposition reactions involve one compound decomposing into two or
    more products.
-   Single replacement reactions occur when one reactant replaces part
    of another compound to form new substances.
-   A common type of double replacement reaction occurs when two ionic
    reactants exchange anions, making two new ionic compounds. The
    precipitation of a solid is a common result for this type
    of reaction.
-   Combustion reactions involve the reaction of a hydrocarbon with
    oxygen gas to produce water and carbon dioxide.

## Lesson Review Questions {#11.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-ztb}

1.  Categorize the following chemical reactions as single replacement,
    double replacement, combustion, combination, or decomposition.
    1.  Equimolar (having the same number of moles) solutions of silver
        nitrate and potassium chloride are mixed to produce solid silver
        chloride and aqueous potassium nitrate.
    2.  Magnesium metal is added to hydrochloric acid to produce
        hydrogen gas and aqueous magnesium chloride.
    3.  Ethanol is burned in air to produce water and carbon
        dioxide gas.
    4.  Water is electrolyzed to produce hydrogen and oxygen gas.
    5.  Hydrogen gas and oxygen gas are ignited to produce water.

2.  Write the balanced chemical equation for the following combination
    and decomposition reactions.
    1.  Magnesium carbonate is heated strongly to produce magnesium
        oxide and carbon dioxide gas.
    2.  Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to produce water and oxygen gas.
    3.  Solid potassium chlorate is heated in the presence of manganese
        dioxide as a catalyst to produce potassium chloride and
        oxygen gas. (Catalysts speed up reactions but are not expressed
        in the overall balanced equation)
    4.  Molten aluminum oxide is electrolyzed using inert (non-reactive)
        electrodes to produce aluminum metal and oxygen gas.

3.  Write the balanced chemical equations for the following replacement
    reactions:
    1.  Zinc metal is added to a solution of iron(II) sulfate.
    2.  Equimolar solutions of lead(II) nitrate and sodium chloride are
        mixed to produce solid lead(II) chloride and aqueous
        sodium nitrate.
    3.  Solutions of potassium phosphate and zinc nitrate are mixed.

4.  Write the balanced chemical equations for the following
    combustion reactions.
    1.  Propane (C ~3~ H ~8~ ) is ignited in air to produce water and
        carbon dioxide gas.
    2.  Methanol(CH ~4~ O) is ignited in air to produce water and carbon
        dioxide gas.
    3.  Ethanol (C ~2~ H ~5~ OH) is burned in air.

5.  Write the molecular equation, ionic equation, and net ionic equation
    for each of the following double replacement reactions.
    1.  Silver nitrate reacts with potassium iodide to produce potassium
        nitrate and silver iodide.
    2.  Silver nitrate reacts with iron(III) chloride to
        produce iron(III) nitrate and silver chloride.
    3.  Lead(II) nitrate reacts with potassium iodide to produce
        potassium nitrate and lead(II) iodide.
    4.  Iron(III) chloride reacts with lead(II) nitrate to
        produce lead(II) chloride and iron(III) nitrate.
    5.  Calcium chloride reacts with sodium hydroxide to produce calcium
        hydroxide and sodium chloride.

6.  Would it be possible to have a double precipitate formed for a
    double replacement process? Can you write an equation where a double
    precipitate forms?
7.  What is meant when we describe a compound as ( *aq* ) or ( *s* )?
    Explain the similarities and differences between these terms.
8.  Write the balanced chemical equation for the combination reaction in
    which hydrogen and oxygen gases react explosively to produce water.
    (Remember that hydrogen and oxygen exist as diatomic gases in their
    most common elemental form.)
9.  Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction that occurs
    when a piece of aluminum metal is placed in a solution of
    silver nitrate.
10. Using the solubility rules given above, predict whether or not the
    following compounds are soluble or insoluble in water.
    1.  Potassium nitrate
    2.  Lead(II) chloride
    3.  Barium sulfate
    4.  Aluminum sulfide
    5.  Calcium carbonate

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#11.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-2zk}

-   Chemical reaction library:
    [http://jchemed.chem.wisc.edu/JCESoft/CCA/CCA3/STILLS/VOLTAGE/VOLTAGE3/64JPG48/3.JPG](3.JPG)
-   Solubility concepts video:
    [http://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/states-of-matter/v/solubility](solubility)
-   How to use a solubility chart:
    [http://www.sophia.org/solubility-table/solubility-table-tutorial](solubility-table-tutorial)

## Points to Consider {#11.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-4zl}

1.  In an earlier section, we discussed the origins of the chemical
    recipe for gunpowder, one of the earliest chemical formulas to
    be described. The recipe for gun powder is 75 percent potassium
    nitrate, 15 percent charcoal, and 10 percent sulfur. How might one
    measure out these amounts in a predictable and reliable way?
2.  So far, we have discussed the characteristics of a variety
    of reactions. However, we have spent little time discussing how we
    might measure and calculate amounts of reactants and products. The
    steel wool reaction is as follows:
    ![4\\text{Fe}\_{(s)}+3\\text{O}\_{2(g)} \\rightarrow
    2\\text{Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_{3(s)}](ck12_math_images_dir/f417a6a68956cea42504edace4a284b3.png) .
    How might you measure the amounts of each reactant used and the
    product that forms?
3.  In the chemical reactions that we have already studied, we have
    assumed that all reactants are transformed into products (the
    reaction "goes to completion"). Are there reactions that do not go
    to completion? How do you know whether you will have reactants left
    over?
4.  What are some factors that control whether or not a chemical
    reaction takes place?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686121] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#11.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-8bu}

1.  Courtesy of NASA.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese\_rocket.gif](File:Chinese_rocket.gif) .
    Public Domain
2.  User:PericlesofAthens/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chinese\_Gunpowder\_Formula.JPG](File:Chinese_Gunpowder_Formula.JPG) .
    Public Domain
3.  Joseph Wright.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:JosephWright-Alchemist.jpg](File:JosephWright-Alchemist.jpg) .
    Public Domain
4.  Oliver H..
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spk-RZ.jpg](File:Spk-RZ.jpg) .
    Public Domain
5.  Jared Tarbel.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/generated/5554654375/]() . CC BY 2.0
6.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
7.  User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn\_reaction\_with\_HCl.JPG](File:Zn_reaction_with_HCl.JPG) .
    Public Domain
8.  Der Kreole.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lluvia\_de\_oro.JPG](File:Lluvia_de_oro.JPG) .
    CC BY 3.0
9.  Flickr:webhamster.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/26316553@N07/2897369014/]() . CC BY
    2.0

<span id="12.html"></span>

# Stoichiometry {#12.html#x-ck12-U3RvaWNoaW9tZXRyeQ..-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_12_files/20151009235253710807.jpeg)
</span>

In the last chapter, we saw how gunpowder stimulated interest in
understanding the composition of matter. The mixture of sulfur, charcoal
and saltpeter (potassium nitrate) was refined until an optimal
(maximally explosive) mixture was obtained. The effectiveness of the
mixture was also affected by the purity of the ingredients. The ability
to refine and reproduce such mixtures was dependent on an understanding
of relative mass and ratios between the different mixture components.
Alchemists and early scientists understood appropriate ratios for
ingredients in a mixture, but determining the ratios of elements that
are required to produce a given compound was sometimes a more difficult
task. In fact, a systematic understanding of relative masses present in
compounds and chemical reactions has only been developed over the last
300 years. Our modern periodic table is based on this knowledge. Using
our current understanding of molar mass, we can now relate the amount of
a substance (numbers of atoms or molecules) to its mass.

In this chapter, we want use these ideas to explore quantitative issues
in chemical reactions. Specifically, we are going to study how the
relations between mass, moles, and numbers of particles can be applied
to chemical reactions. This topic is referred to as stoichiometry, a
term derived from the Greek words *stoicheion* (element) and *metron*
(to measure). Understanding the chemical world in terms of stoichiometry
allows us to describe and predict the ratios in which reactants combine
to generate products in a given chemical process. An understanding of
stoichiometry was an important step in developing the capacity to
manipulate, create, and replicate new chemical formulations. This
knowledge is required for any practical fields in which new chemical
substances are created, including pharmaceuticals, diagnostic medicine,
agricultural chemistry, and even cosmetics.

^User:Millenium187/Wikimedia\\ Commons.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brno\_Underground\_-\_Cabbage\_Square\_-\_Alchemical\_kitchen\_I.JPG.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686123] -->

# Mole Ratios {#12.html#x-ck12-TW9sZSBSYXRpb3M.}

## Lesson Objectives {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-vcy}

-   Be able to calculate the number of moles, molecules, or atoms in
    a sample.
-   Be able to describe mole ratios for reactants and products of a
    given chemical reaction.
-   Understand stoichiometry and stoichiometric coefficients.
-   Be able to calculate the moles of reactants needed or products
    generated for a reaction based on its balanced chemical equation.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-oov}

-   **mole ratio** : When the relative amounts of two reaction
    components are expressed as a ratio.
-   **stoichiometry** : Calculations involving the relative amounts of
    various reactants and products that participate in a
    chemical reaction.

## Check Your Understanding {#12.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-lxz}

1.  Calculate molar masses for the following compounds:
    1.  H ~2~ O
    2.  NH ~3~
    3.  CH ~4~

2.  Calculate the mass (in grams) of the following samples:
    1.  2.6 moles of water.
    2.  1.4 x 10 ^23^ atoms of sulfur.

## Introduction {#12.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-oug}

When making a batch of chocolate chip cookies, a baker must pay careful
attention to the amounts of ingredients he uses. The flour, sugar,
butter, and chocolate chips must be measured and used in the correct
ratios in order for the cookies to bake well. If the baker only has a
certain amount of flour, only a certain amount of cookies can be made.
Similarly, in chemical reactions, the resulting product is based on the
initial moles of reactants present. In this lesson, you will learn how
to calculate and account for the amounts of reactants and products in a
given chemical reaction.

## Mole Ratios: Equating Changes in Amount {#12.html#x-ck12-TW9sZSBSYXRpb3M6IEVxdWF0aW5nIENoYW5nZXMgaW4gQW1vdW50-t96}

We previously saw that mass is conserved for any chemical reaction.
Atoms present during the beginning of a chemical reaction must be
present at the end as well, even though they may be arranged in
different ways. Consider the reaction between iron and oxygen to produce
iron(III) oxide:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-ljc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-g5e">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-k7f">
<dd>
4Fe(s) + 3O ~2~ (g) → 2Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
According to this equation 4 moles of iron will react with 3 moles of
oxygen gas (O ~2~ ) to produce 2 moles of iron(III) oxide, Fe ~2~ O ~3~
, as a product. Of course, we do not need exactly 4 moles of iron or 3
moles of oxygen for this reaction to occur. Rather, this equation tells
us the ratio in which these reactants combine to make a particular
product.

When we express the relative amounts of two reaction components as a
ratio, we refer to this as a **mole ratio** or a stoichiometric ratio.
Mole ratios can be made between two reactants, two products, or one of
each. For example, the following mole ratios can be obtained by looking
at the balanced equation shown above:

![\\frac{4 \\ \\text{mol Fe}}{3 \\ \\text{mol O}\_2} \\ or \\ \\frac{3
\\ \\text{mol O}\_2}{4 \\ \\text{mol
Fe}}](ck12_math_images_dir/1c29d6118129221eb2156c860fd63089.png)

![\\frac{4 \\ \\text{mol Fe}}{2 \\ \\text{mol Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_3} \\ or
\\ \\frac{2 \\ \\text{mol Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_3}{4 \\ \\text{mol
Fe}}](ck12_math_images_dir/1bfee4ec3cfcbd1e1026cf69f9ce7022.png)

![\\frac{3 \\ \\text{mol O}\_2}{2 \\ \\text{mol Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_3} \\
or \\ \\frac{3 \\ \\text{mol O}\_2}{2 \\ \\text{mol
Fe}\_2\\text{O}\_3}](ck12_math_images_dir/3f2bbf95822299acb4604b0b42e5dde0.png)

**Stoichiometry** refers to the calculations involving mole ratios to
determine the relative amounts of reactants needed to produce a given
amount of product. Consider the reaction of sodium chloride with silver
nitrate:

AgNO ~3(aq)~ + NaCl ~(aq)~ → AgCl ~(s)~ + NaNO ~3(aq)~

Silver chloride is an important compound that is commonly used in the
production of photographic film. It also has many other uses, such as an
antidote for mercury poisoning, a component of pottery glazes, and a
reference standard for electrochemistry setups. It can be produced
according to the reaction shown above. Now we will practice use of mole
ratios and stoichiometry to determine the amounts of products and
reactants necessary in our reaction.

**Example 12.1**

How many moles of each reactant are needed to produce 0.5 mol of silver
chloride?

*Answer:*

For this problem, we need to relate moles of each reactant to moles of
the product silver chloride. The mole ratio of silver nitrate to silver
chloride is constructed as follows:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_12_files/20151009235253839739.png)
</span>

As shown above, we would need 0.5 mol of silver nitrate to produce 0.5
mol of silver chloride.

We could also express the moles of silver chloride in terms of sodium
chloride, our other reactant. Here is how we would do this:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_12_files/20151009235253957664.png)
</span>

Therefore, we would also need 0.5 mol of sodium chloride in order to
produce 0.5 mol of silver chloride. Notice that in each case, we use the
mole ratio to relate moles of reactants to moles of products.

Not all reactions have 1:1 ratios between reactants and products. For
instance, the reaction between lead(II) nitrate and sodium chloride
produces the precipitate lead(II) chloride and aqueous sodium nitrate:

Pb(NO ~3~ ) ~2(aq)~ + 2NaCl ~(aq)~ → PbCl ~2(s)~ + 2 NaNO ~3(aq)~

<div
id="12.html#x-ck12-MzIwZTJlMWQ5MWFlOTliMjNmM2E5OWQzODNjNjNhNjk.-ksl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Martin Walker (User:Walkerma/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lead(II)_chloride.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_12_files/20151009235254062889.jpeg)

**Figure 12.1**

Lead(II) chloride is commonly used in the production of decorative
glass, called Aurene. It also has many other uses. For example, it is
used in the production of paints and in industrial processes that remove
unwanted metals.

</div>

**Example 12.2**

If we wanted to make 0.5 mol of lead(II) chloride, how many moles of
each reactant would be needed?

*Answer:*

First, we will relate moles of the reactant sodium chloride to the
desired product. The mole ratio between these two substances can be used
as a conversion factor as follows:

0.5 mol PbCl ~2~ × ( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{2 \\ \\text{mol NaCl}}{1 \\
\\text{mol
PbCl}\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/902b82bad589b06de2835e9c76edf220.png) )
= 1 mol NaCl

In order to produce 0.5 mol of lead(II) chloride, we would need 1 mol of
sodium chloride. The necessary amount of the other reactant can be
calculated in the same way:

0.5 mol PbCl ~2~ × ( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ \\text{mol
Pb}(\\text{NO}\_3)\_2}{1 \\ \\text{mol
PbCl}\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/45519ed8250fa6629a8dd9fd10f25534.png) )
= 0.5 mol Pb(NO ~3~ ) ~2~

We can use mole ratios to determine the amounts of reactants needed to
produce a given amount of product. As we will see in the next lesson, we
can also convert these amounts into masses using our understanding of
molar mass.

## Lesson Summary {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-fo7}

-   Mole ratios can be derived from a balanced chemical equation. These
    ratios can then be used to determine the amounts of each substance
    involved in a given chemical reaction.
-   Stoichiometry refers to calculations involving the relative amounts
    of various reactants and products that participate in a
    chemical reaction.

## Lesson Review Questions {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-rpv}

1.  Aluminum reacts with oxygen to produce aluminum oxide as follows:
    4Al + 3O ~2~ → 2Al ~2~ O ~3~
    1.  If you use 2.3 moles of Al, how many moles of Al ~2~ O ~3~ can
        you make?
    2.  If you want 3.9 moles of Al ~2~ O ~3~ , how many moles of O ~2~
        are needed?

2.  In the presence of sulfuric acid, metallic iron forms iron(III)
    sulfate: 2Fe + 3H ~2~ SO ~4~ → Fe ~2~ (SO ~4~ ) ~3~ + 3H ~2~
    1.  How many moles of hydrogen will be produced when you use 1.7
        moles of iron?
    2.  How much sulfuric acid is needed to produce 2.8 moles
        of iron(III) sulfate?

3.  Write the mole ratios for reactants in terms of products for the
    following equation: 2 Mg + O ~2~ → 2 MgO
4.  How many moles of each reactant are needed to produce 2.5 mol of
    aluminum oxide by the following reaction? 4 Al + 3 O ~2~ → 2 Al ~2~
    O ~3~
5.  How many moles of each reactant would be necessary to produce 2.6
    mol of barium sulfate by the following reaction? BaCl ~2~ + Na ~2~
    SO ~4~ → BaSO ~4~ + 2NaCl

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#12.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-qec}

-   Practice using mole ratios:
    [http://www.wisc-online.com/Objects/ViewObject.aspx?ID=GCH7304](ViewObject.aspx?ID=GCH7304)
-   Review of what stoichiometry is:
    [http://www.chem4kids.com/files/react\_stoichio.html](react_stoichio.html)

## Points to Consider {#12.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-lrv}

-   If you know how many moles of product a reaction yielded, can you
    find the mass of reactants used in the initial reaction?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686123] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686124] -->

# Stoichiometric Calculations {#12.html#x-ck12-U3RvaWNoaW9tZXRyaWMgQ2FsY3VsYXRpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-yfw}

-   Based on the balanced chemical equation, be able to calculate the
    masses of reactants or products generated in a given reaction.
-   Based on the balanced chemical equation, be able to calculate the
    moles of reactants or products generated in a given reaction.
-   Understand how to convert between masses and moles in a chemical
    reaction using mole ratios and molar masses.

## Check Your Understanding {#12.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-t8r}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#12.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._1-yy2}

1.  How much hydrogen is needed to form 3.1 moles of tin according to
    the following reaction?

<dl id="x-ck12-Y2I5YzVmYmM2OTEwNTRiOTljMjYzNDc1ZjlhM2U0NmM.-alh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Y2I5YzVmYmM2OTEwNTRiOTljMjYzNDc1ZjlhM2U0NmM.-dut">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Y2I5YzVmYmM2OTEwNTRiOTljMjYzNDc1ZjlhM2U0NmM.-apk">
<dd>
SnO ~2~ + 2 H ~2~ → Sn + 2H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
## Mole Ratios, Molar Masses, and Chemical Equations {#12.html#x-ck12-TW9sZSBSYXRpb3MsIE1vbGFyIE1hc3NlcywgYW5kIENoZW1pY2FsIEVxdWF0aW9ucw.._1-of6}

How can we measure out a known amount of a reactant, since actually
counting atoms and molecules is not a practical approach? How can we
tell what amount of product was generated in a reaction? In most cases,
the mass of a reactant or product is a relatively easy quantity to
measure. Recall that the molar mass of a given chemical species can be
determined by referencing the periodic table. If we know the identity of
the substance we wish to measure, molar mass can be used as a conversion
factor between mass and amount (in moles). For any given chemical
reaction, we can describe the following relationships in the **Figure**
[below](#12.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTItMDYtTW9sZS1SYXRpb3M.) .

<div
id="12.html#x-ck12-YTc4ZmYxMjEyNjFiZDRhNDNiOTY2OWM5YmM3YzA2ZDc.-ljc"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_12_files/20151009235254196091.png)

**Figure 12.2**

This image depicts how moles, mass, and mole ratios are related for a
given chemical equation.

</div>

**Example 12.3**

AgNO ~3(aq)~ + NaCl ~(aq)~ → AgCl ~(s)~ + NaNO ~3(aq)~

How many grams of each reactant are needed to produce 0.500 mol of
silver chloride?

*Answer:*

First, we need to relate the mass of silver nitrate to the amount in
moles of the product silver chloride. This can be accomplished by using
a series of conversion factors in which all units cancel except for
those of the desired answer (grams of silver nitrate). To do this, we
will need the mole ratio between these two reaction components and the
molar mass of silver nitrate. Then, we can perform the following
calculation:

![\\mathrm{0.500 \\: mol \\: AgCl \\times (\\frac{1 \\: mol \\:
AgNO\_3}{1 \\: mol \\: AgCl})(\\frac{169.87 \\: g \\: AgNO\_3}{1 \\: mol
\\: AgNO\_3})=84.9 \\: g \\:
AgNO\_3}](ck12_math_images_dir/74175a32b672e3a88a0b70310db8c1b3.png)

In order to produce 0.500 moles of AgCl, we would need to start with
84.9 g of silver nitrate. A similar calculation can be performed to
determine the necessary mass of sodium chloride.

![\\mathrm{0.500 \\: mol \\: AgCl \\times (\\frac{1 \\: mol \\: NaCl}{1
\\: mol \\: AgCl})(\\frac{58.44\\:g\\:NaCl}{1 \\: mol \\:
NaCl})=29.2\\:g\\:NaCl}](ck12_math_images_dir/4032a27e5485146475fcf8f855fe11f2.png)

**Mass Reactants
![\\mathrm{\\leftrightarrow}](ck12_math_images_dir/7fd1454826c4dddab8e72c3c64f232c4.png)
Moles Reactants
![\\mathrm{\\leftrightarrow}](ck12_math_images_dir/7fd1454826c4dddab8e72c3c64f232c4.png)
Moles Products
![\\mathrm{\\leftrightarrow}](ck12_math_images_dir/7fd1454826c4dddab8e72c3c64f232c4.png)
Mass Products**

In the chemistry lab, we frequently need to calculate the relationship
between two reactants or products in a chemical reaction. For example,
we may know the mass of one reactant and want to know how much of a
given product will be generated if the reactant is fully consumed. We
may also wish to know how much of a second reactant is required to fully
react with the first reactant. These types of questions can be answered
by using molar masses and mole ratios as conversion factors. We will
illustrate this process with an example.

**Example 12.4**

How many grams of lead(II) chloride would be produced if 1.67 g of
lead(II) nitrate is allowed to react completely in the presence of a
sodium chloride solution? How many grams of sodium chloride would be
consumed in the process?

<dl id="x-ck12-N2ZlMzlhMTA4ZWMyZTdjN2JhNzg5MjVjOWI1MTk1ZWE.-cf3">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-N2ZlMzlhMTA4ZWMyZTdjN2JhNzg5MjVjOWI1MTk1ZWE.-qn1">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-N2ZlMzlhMTA4ZWMyZTdjN2JhNzg5MjVjOWI1MTk1ZWE.-ga6">
<dd>
Pb(NO ~3~ ) ~2(aq)~ + 2 NaCl ~(aq)~ → PbCl ~2(s)~ + 2 NaNO ~3(aq)~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
*Answer:*

First, we need to relate grams of lead(II) chloride to grams of lead(II)
nitrate. We can set up the following expression, using the molar masses
of each component and their mole ratio, obtained from the balanced
equation:

1.67 Pb(NO ~3~ ) ~2~ × ( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ mol \\
Pb(NO\_3)\_2}{331.2 \\ g \\
Pb(NO\_3)\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/d2b240c912314bb3a167be4292107fb7.png)
)( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ PbCl\_2}{1 \\ mol \\
Pb(NO\_3)\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3b443451dc765b6fbf5c0cb4b8d7bbde.png)
)( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{278.11 \\ g \\ PbCl\_2}{1 \\ mol \\
PbCl\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/aa5ff5d331176a568dd020fda8f03387.png)
)=1.40 g PbCl ~2~

Therefore, 1.40 g of lead(II) chloride would be produced if 1.67 g of
lead(II) nitrate is fully consumed. The amount of NaCl that would be
used in this process can be calculated as follows:

1.67 Pb(NO ~3~ ) ~2~ × ( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ mol \\
Pb(NO\_3)\_2}{331.2 \\ g \\
Pb(NO\_3)\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/d2b240c912314bb3a167be4292107fb7.png)
)( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{2 \\ mol \\ NaCl}{1 \\ mol \\
Pb(NO\_3)\_2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/d09b66d918f45224dca9cf420e825304.png)
)( ![\\mathrm{\\frac{58.44 \\ g \\ NaCl}{1 \\ mol \\
NaCl}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3fc994f9e84a1b721040e441d52f9257.png) ) =
0.589 g NaCl

In order to fully consume 1.67 g of lead(II) nitrate, we would need at
least 0.589 g of NaCl.

## Lesson Summary {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-9jf}

-   Using molar masses and mole ratios, we can find the relationships
    between the masses of various reaction components for a
    given reaction.

## Lesson Review Questions {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-rop}

1.  Aluminum reacts with oxygen to produce aluminum oxide according to
    the following equation: 4Al + 3O ~2~ → 2Al ~2~ O ~3~
    1.  How many grams of O ~2~ are needed to produce 5 moles of Al ~2~
        O ~3~ ?
    2.  How many grams of Al ~2~ O ~3~ are produced from the reaction of
        5 moles of Al?
    3.  How many grams of Al are needed to produce 86.0 grams of Al ~2~
        O ~3~ ?

2.  How many grams of each reactant are needed to produce 0.500 mol of
    barium sulfate according the following equation? BaCl ~2~ + Na ~2~
    SO ~4~ → BaSO ~4~ + 2NaCl
3.  How many grams of each reactant are needed to produce 28.6 grams
    copper (II) sulfide by the following reaction? Cu + SO ~2~ → CuS + O
    ~2~

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#12.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-w0x}

1.  Stoichiometry Calculator:
    [http://mmsphyschem.com/stoichiometry.htm](stoichiometry.htm)
2.  Practice Balancing Chemical Equations:
    1.  [http://education.jlab.org/elementbalancing/index.html](index.html)
    2.  [http://www.files.chem.vt.edu/RVGS/ACT/notes/scripts/bal\_eq1.html](bal_eq1.html)
    3.  [http://gregthatcher.org/Chemistry/BalanceEquation/S](S)

3.  Chemical equation balances:
    [http://www.personal.psu.edu/jzl157/balance.htm](balance.htm)

## Points to Consider {#12.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-o3w}

-   Our study of masses and amounts, as described by a given chemical
    equation, has assumed that mass is conserved for all
    chemical processes. How might you determine experimentally that this
    is the case for a given chemical reaction?
-   So far, we have assumed that all of the reactants are utilized in
    the formation of products during each reaction. Can you think of a
    case in which one or more reactants would not be completely
    consumed?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686124] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686125] -->

# Limiting Reactant and Percent Yield {#12.html#x-ck12-TGltaXRpbmcgUmVhY3RhbnQgYW5kIFBlcmNlbnQgWWllbGQ.}

## Lesson Objectives {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-zte}

-   Define limiting reagent, theoretical yield, and percent yield.
-   Calculate theoretical yield for a given chemical process.
-   Be able to determine which reactant is the limiting reactant,
    calculate the amount of product formed, and determine the
    percent yield.
-   Use reaction tables to describe mass and mole changes for a given
    chemical reaction.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-upy}

-   **actual yield** : The amount of product that is actually produced.
-   **theoretical yield** : The maximum amount of product that can be
    generated from the given amounts of reactants.
-   **percent yield** : Tells us what percentage of the possible amount
    of product (the theoretical yield) was actually obtained (the
    actual yield).
-   **excess reactant (excess reagent)** : When there is more reactant
    available than is required to react with the other
    available reactants. Some amount of reactant will be leftover at the
    end of the reaction.
-   **limiting reactant (limiting reagent)** : The reactant that is
    completely consumed in a reaction.

## Check Your Understanding {#12.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-hft}

Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions:

1.  Methane (CH ~4~ ) reacts with oxygen in the air to produce water and
    carbon dioxide.
2.  Solutions of barium chloride and sodium sulfate react to form a
    precipitate of barium sulfate and an aqueous solution of
    sodium chloride.
3.  Carbon monoxide reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide.

## Introduction {#12.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-stq}

In the last lesson, we learned how to perform stoichiometry
calculations, which relate masses and moles of reactants and products
for a given chemical process. In this lesson, we are going to compare
theoretical yield (the maximum amount that could be produced in a
reaction) to actual yield (the amount that is actually produced). We
will also investigate what happens when one reactant runs out before the
other reactants are fully consumed. Finally, we will study how to
express changes in masses and moles for a given chemical process using
the reaction table method.

## Reaction Yield {#12.html#x-ck12-UmVhY3Rpb24gWWllbGQ._2-wrd}

### Actual vs. Theoretical Yield {#12.html#x-ck12-QWN0dWFsIHZzLiBUaGVvcmV0aWNhbCBZaWVsZA.._2-ymx}

The yield of a chemical reaction is the amount of certain product that
is produced from given amounts of each reactant. The **actual yield** is
the amount of product that is actually produced. This value is generally
not exactly equal to the **theoretical yield** , which represents the
maximum amount that could be generated from the given amounts of
reactants. For example, say we performed the copper cycle as described
in the introduction by starting with 1.00 grams of copper.
Theoretically, the final reaction should give us back 1.00 grams of
copper; this is our theoretical yield. However, we may find that only
0.86 grams of Cu is produced; this would be our actual yield. When we
perform stoichiometric calculations, we are attempting to determine the
theoretical yield based on the amounts of reactants available. Actual
yields can only be determined by performing the experiment and measuring
the final mass of product.

### Percent Yield {#12.html#x-ck12-UGVyY2VudCBZaWVsZA.._2-uln}

A common way to express the yield of a reaction is as a percentage. The
**percent yield** of a reaction tells us what percentage of the possible
amount of product (the theoretical yield) was actually obtained (the
actual yield). Percent yield can be calculated using the following
expression:

![\\text{Percent Yield} = \\mathrm{\\frac{Actual \\ Yield}{Theoretical
\\ Yield}} \\times
100\\%](ck12_math_images_dir/0c105d33d7d949bd75e00f1e945af604.png)

**Example 12.6**

You calculate that 1.00 grams of copper should be produced (theoretical
yield) from a given chemical process. After you run the experiment, you
find that 0.860 grams of copper is obtained. Calculate the percent yield
for this process.

*Answer:*

![\\text{Percent Yield} &= \\mathrm{\\frac{0.860 \\ g \\ Cu}{1.00 \\ g
\\ Cu}} \\times 100\\% \\\\\\&=86\\%
](ck12_math_images_dir/ef9787ab8d4b34cf22a278b96a20bb35.png)

## The Reaction Table Method {#12.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFJlYWN0aW9uIFRhYmxlIE1ldGhvZA.._2-l0g}

A reaction table can be used to keep track of the masses and moles of
each reaction component over the course of a chemical reaction. For the
generic reaction shown below, we can set up the following **Table**
[below](#12.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6UmVhY3Rpb25UYWJsZQ..) .

<dl id="x-ck12-MTg2MDE4ZmVlNjU2N2U3MWMzMDNkYzI5MjhjMDJhNTg.-jrk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTg2MDE4ZmVlNjU2N2U3MWMzMDNkYzI5MjhjMDJhNTg.-lk2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTg2MDE4ZmVlNjU2N2U3MWMzMDNkYzI5MjhjMDJhNTg.-8px">
<dd>
aA + bB → cC + dD

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 A              B              C              D
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  Molar Mass                                                  

  Initial Mass                                                

  Initial Moles                                               

  Change in      -ax            -bx            +cx            +dx
  Moles                                                       

  Final Moles                                                 

  Final Mass                                                  
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note: The change in the number of moles for each reactant and product
must be consistent with the mole ratios in the balanced chemical
equation. This is designated by the factor of "x" in the Change in Moles
row of the reaction table. Also recall that as a chemical reaction takes
place, the reactants are being used up (indicating a negative change in
moles) and the products are being created (indicating a positive change
in moles).

**Steps to Solving Chemical Reaction Problems**

1.  Write the balanced reaction.
2.  Draw a reaction table.
3.  Fill in the known values.
4.  Calculate the missing values.

This process is easiest to explain in the form of an example problem.

**Example 12.7**

Magnesium metal is heated in the presence of oxygen gas to produce
magnesium oxide.

<dl id="x-ck12-YjMwMjVjMGNhZWE0NzNjN2M0OGVhM2M4Y2M1YmViZTc.-dur">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjMwMjVjMGNhZWE0NzNjN2M0OGVhM2M4Y2M1YmViZTc.-6je">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjMwMjVjMGNhZWE0NzNjN2M0OGVhM2M4Y2M1YmViZTc.-cls">
<dd>
2Mg(s)+ O ~2~ (g) → 2MgO(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If 1.00 grams of Mg react completely with excess oxygen, how many grams
of magnesium oxide will be produced? How many grams of oxygen will be
used?

*Answer:*

First, write the balanced reaction, and then draw a blank reaction
table. The changes in moles of each component can be written in terms of
a variable x, which we will solve for. The relative number of moles
added to or subtracted from each amount is based on the coefficients
from the balanced equation.

<dl id="x-ck12-YjMwMjVjMGNhZWE0NzNjN2M0OGVhM2M4Y2M1YmViZTc.-bgf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjMwMjVjMGNhZWE0NzNjN2M0OGVhM2M4Y2M1YmViZTc.-643">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjMwMjVjMGNhZWE0NzNjN2M0OGVhM2M4Y2M1YmViZTc.-nyu">
<dd>
2Mg(s) + O ~2~ (g) → 2MgO(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                     Mg                 O ~2~              MgO
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass                                               
  Initial Mass                                             
  Initial Moles                                            
  Change in Moles    -2x                -x                 +2x
  Final Moles                                              
  Final Mass                                               

Now, fill in the known values. We are told that the initial mass of
magnesium is 1.00 grams. We are also told that our magnesium sample
reacts completely, so the final mass of magnesium (and the final moles)
will be 0. We do not know exactly how much oxygen gas is present, but it
is an **excess reactant** (sometimes called an excess reagent), which
means that there is more than enough oxygen to react with the other
available reactants. We can simply write "excess" in both the initial
and final masses/moles for this reactant. Unless told otherwise, assume
that there is no initial product (the initial mass and moles of MgO
would be 0). Additionally, we can calculate the molar masses for each
reactant and product by looking at the periodic table:

<dl id="x-ck12-NTVkZWJlNmRjYmY3M2NhOGIxN2EzMjc4ZTY3NmQ0ZTk.-gk0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWJkNWZkZjFkZWI2YjgyN2ZjNWIwMDg2YWNiMGQ2MWI.-q6m">
<dd>
Mg = 24.31 g/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWYyOTUxYzQxNjcyNzJhNjdlYTExNTE5YWZhZmM5OGE.-i5a">
<dd>
O ~2~ = 32.00 g/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MmNlOTY4MjhkNWIzZWMwZmI4MDRhYjUwNzAxOTBkYmY.-ior">
<dd>
MgO = 40.31 g/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                     Mg                 O ~2~              MgO
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         24.31 g/mol        32.00 g/mol        40.31 g/mol
  Initial Mass       1.00 g             excess             0 g
  Initial Moles                         excess             0 mol
  Change in Moles    -2x                -x                 +2x
  Final Moles        0 mol              excess             
  Final Mass         0 g                excess             

Now, fill in the remaining values by performing calculations. We can use
molar masses to convert between grams and moles for any known amount.

![1.00 \\text{ g Mg} (\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ Mg}{24.31 \\ g \\
Mg}}) = 0.0411 \\text{ mol
Mg}](ck12_math_images_dir/6c0428684e3d095e244db972092fb39b.png)

Once we know the difference between the initial and final moles for any
of the reaction components, we can calculate the value of x. Over the
course of the reaction, 0.0411 moles of Mg are used up, so

![-2x &= -0.0411 \\ \\text{mol} \\\\\\x &= 0.0206 \\
\\text{mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/fb29f57ec66cb9f831e1cecbae5742f1.png)

Using this information, we can fill in more of the table:

                     Mg                 O ~2~              MgO
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         24.31 g/mol        32.00 g/mol        40.31 g/mol
  Initial Mass       1.00 g             excess             0 g
  Initial Moles      0.0411 mol         excess             0 mol
  Change in Moles    -0.0411 mol        -0.0206 mol        +0.0411 mol
  Final Moles        0 mol              excess             
  Final Mass         0 g                excess             

Using our value for x, we can now perform simple addition to determine
the final moles of MgO. This can then be converted to grams using the
molar mass.

                     Mg                 O ~2~              MgO
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         24.31 g/mol        32.00 g/mol        40.31 g/mol
  Initial Mass       1.00 g             excess             0 g
  Initial Moles      0.0411 mol         excess             0 mol
  Change in Moles    -0.0411 mol        -0.0206 mol        +0.0411 mol
  Final Moles        0 mol              excess             0.0411 mol
  Final Mass         0 g                excess             1.66 g

Now that the table is complete, we can answer the original questions. We
can see directly from the table that 1.66 grams of MgO could be produced
from this reaction. We do not yet know the mass of oxygen that is used
up, but we do know that 0.0206 moles are consumed. Converting this to
grams using the molar mass of O ~2~ gives us the following:

![0.0206 \\ \\text{mol O}\_2 \\times (\\mathrm{\\frac{32.00 \\ g \\
O\_2}{1 \\ mol \\ O\_2}}) = 0.659 \\ \\text{g
O}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/2dab849d4983e27d7f28df1a4c79f398.png)

1.00 grams of Mg reacts completely with 0.659 grams of O ~2~ to produce
1.66 grams of MgO.

## Limiting Reactant {#12.html#x-ck12-TGltaXRpbmcgUmVhY3RhbnQ._2-ivj}

So far, we have either assumed that all reactants will be completely
consumed in a chemical reaction, or we have been told that one reactant
is present in excess. In the previous example, 1 gram of magnesium
reacted in the presence of excess oxygen. However, we may sometimes be
presented with initial amounts of multiple reactants without being told
which one will run out first. In such a scenario, the **limiting
reactant** (sometimes called a limiting reagent) will be the reactant
that is completely consumed. After the limiting reactant runs out, there
may still be some of the excess reactants left over, but the reaction
can no longer proceed, because one of the ingredients is missing. To
determine which reactant is limiting in a chemical reaction, we need to
look at how many moles of each are present. These values must then be
compared to the coefficients in the balanced equation, which tell us the
ratios in which various reactants combine.

Before working with chemical reactions, it may help to explain the
concept of limiting reactants in a more familiar context. For example,
let's say that you want to make as many cheese sandwiches as possible
with the bread and cheese that is available.

**Example 12.8**

You have 16 slices of bread and 10 slices of cheese. If each sandwich
requires two slices of bread and one slice of cheese, how many
sandwiches can you make, and what ingredients will be left over? For
this "reaction," which reactant is limiting, and which one is present in
excess?

*Answer:*

For this example, we could simply start subtracting bread and cheese as
each sandwich is made. After making 8 sandwiches, we would find that we
have run out of bread, but there are two slices of cheese left over.
Thus, bread is the limiting reactant, and cheese is present in excess.
Notice that we actually have more slices of bread than of cheese, but
because it gets used up twice as fast, bread runs out first (it is
limiting).

An alternative way to look at this problem would be to write this
"reaction" out as a chemical equation.

2 Bread + Cheese → Sandwich

We cannot directly compare the amounts of bread and cheese, because they
are not used in a 1:1 ratio. However, if we divide each amount by the
coefficient from the balanced equation, we get the following:

![\\mathrm{\\frac{16 \\ slices \\ bread}{2}} &=8
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\frac{10 \\ slices \\ cheese}{1}}
&=10](ck12_math_images_dir/ccd6a17498abf0dedb05397a0489a731.png)

These values can be directly compared. After dividing each amount by its
coefficient from the balanced equation, the smallest number corresponds
to the ingredient that will run out first. In this case, the limiting
reactant is bread, because 8 &lt; 10. To determine how much of the
excess reactant is left over, we need to determine how much will be used
up by the limiting reactant. In order to use up all of the limiting
reactant (16 slices of bread), we would need:

![16 \\ \\text{slices bread} \\times (\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ slice \\
cheese}{2 \\ slices \\ bread}}) = 8 \\ \\text{slices
cheese}](ck12_math_images_dir/d388b0f3e62d56193189062999559451.png)

After using 8 slices of cheese, all the bread will be used up, and the
"reaction" stops. Subtracting this amount from our original 10 slices of
cheese, we can see that there will be two slices left over.

Here is an interactive simulation to help you visualize reactions
involving limiting reactants:
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/reactants-products-and-leftovers](reactants-products-and-leftovers)
.

## Limiting Reactants and Reaction Tables {#12.html#x-ck12-TGltaXRpbmcgUmVhY3RhbnRzIGFuZCBSZWFjdGlvbiBUYWJsZXM._2-apf}

Filling out a reaction table will help to double-check that you have
found the correct limiting reactant, and it will give you information
about theoretical yields and the amounts that will be left over for any
excess reactants.

**Example 12.9**

3.40 g of hydrogen gas and 7.16 g of nitrogen gas react to form gaseous
ammonia. Assume that the reaction runs until one of the reactants is
fully consumed.

*Answer:*

First, write the balanced equation for this reaction and set up a
reaction table. Fill in the amounts given in the problem, and calculate
the molar masses of each reaction component. Recall that the "change in
moles" line is based on the coefficients from the balanced equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZGU5NjFkYWE2ZDYzYWNmMDIyYWVkOWI4MjMwYjVlMTE.-yzv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZGU5NjFkYWE2ZDYzYWNmMDIyYWVkOWI4MjMwYjVlMTE.-bnd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZGU5NjFkYWE2ZDYzYWNmMDIyYWVkOWI4MjMwYjVlMTE.-xrt">
<dd>
N ~2(g)~ + 3 H ~2(g)~ → 2NH ~3(g)~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
                     N ~2~              3H ~2~             2NH ~3~
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         28.02 g/mol        2.02 g/mol         17.04 g/mol
  Initial Mass       7.16 g             3.40 g             0 g
  Initial Moles                                            0 mol
  Change in Moles    -x                 -3x                +2x
  Final Moles                                              
  Final Mass                                               

Next, use molar masses to convert the known masses to moles:

![7.16 \\ \\text{g N}\_2 (\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ N\_2}{28.02 \\ g
\\ N\_2}}) &= 0.256 \\ \\text{mol N}\_2 \\\\\\3.40 \\ \\text{g H}\_2
(\\mathrm{\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ H\_2}{2.02 \\ g \\ H\_2}}) &= 1.68 \\
\\text{mol
H}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/f8e0e59fc21138db79dcd1bf04d59546.png)

Now that we have the moles of each reactant, we can divide by the
coefficients from the balanced equation to determine which will run out
first.

![\\mathrm{\\frac{0.256 \\ mol \\ N\_2}{1}} &=0.256
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\frac{1.68 \\ mol \\ H\_2}{3}}
&=0.560](ck12_math_images_dir/a8cc79ddec73524d323ddc287b421819.png)

Because the number for N ~2~ is lower, N ~2~ is the limiting reactant.
Since this reaction is run until a reactant runs out, we now know that
the final mass of N ~2~ will be 0 grams. Putting this new information
into the table, we get the following:

                     N ~2~              3H ~2~             2NH ~3~
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         28.02 g/mol        2.02 g/mol         17.04 g/mol
  Initial Mass       7.16 g             3.40 g             0 g
  Initial Moles      0.256 mol          1.68 mol           0 mol
  Change in Moles    -x                 -3x                +2x
  Final Moles        0 mol                                 
  Final Mass         0 g                                   

Looking at the difference between the initial and final moles for N ~2~
, it is clear that x must have a value of 0.256 moles. Using this value,
we can replace the "Change in Moles" line with specific values, and the
"Final Moles" line can be filled in by simple addition or subtraction.

                     N ~2~              3H ~2~             2NH ~3~
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         28.02 g/mol        2.02 g/mol         17.04 g/mol
  Initial Mass       7.16 g             3.40 g             0 g
  Initial Moles      0.256 mol          1.68 mol           0 mol
  Change in Moles    -0.256 mol         -0.768 mol         +0.512 mol
  Final Moles        0 mol              0.91 mol           0.512 mol
  Final Mass         0 g                                   

Finally, we can convert moles to grams using the molar masses of each
reaction component:

![0.91 \\ \\text{mol H}\_2 \\times (\\mathrm{\\frac{2.02 \\ g \\ H\_2}{1
\\ mol \\ H\_2}}) &=1.84 \\ \\text{g H}\_2 \\\\\\0.512 \\ \\text{mol
NH}\_3 \\times (\\mathrm{\\frac{17.04 \\ g \\ NH\_3}{1 \\ mol \\
NH\_3}}) &=8.72 \\ \\text{g
NH}\_3](ck12_math_images_dir/d60feca81dc998e1a932b36899d0cd25.png)

                     N ~2~              3H ~2~             2NH ~3~
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Molar Mass         28.02 g/mol        2.02 g/mol         17.04 g/mol
  Initial Mass       7.16 g             3.40 g             0 g
  Initial Moles      0.256 mol          1.68 mol           0 mol
  Change in Moles    -0.256 mol         -0.768 mol         +0.512 mol
  Final Moles        0 mol              0.91 mol           0.512 mol
  Final Mass         0 g                1.84 g             8.72 g

Note that if we calculate the total mass of all components, it is the
same before and after the reaction (10.56 g total). This is consistent
with the law of conservation of mass.

Now, we can answer specific questions about this reaction. The limiting
reactant is N ~2~ , because it is completely used up before any of the
other reactants. We would know that we chose the wrong limiting reactant
if any of the other final amounts turned out to be negative numbers. The
theoretical yield of ammonia is 8.72 g, and there is 1.84 g of H ~2~
left over after the reaction is complete.

If the yield is 87.5%, we can perform the following calculation:

![\\mathrm{Percent \\ Yield} &= \\mathrm{\\frac{Actual \\
Yield}{Theoretical \\ Yield} \\times 100 \\%} \\\\\\\\mathrm{Actual \\
Yield} &= \\mathrm{(Theoretical \\ Yield)(\\frac{Percent \\ Yield}{100
\\%})} \\\\\\\\mathrm{Actual \\ Yield} &= \\mathrm{(8.62 \\
g)(\\frac{87.5 \\%}{100 \\%})} \\\\\\\\mathrm{Actual \\ Yield} &=
\\mathrm{7.54 \\
g}](ck12_math_images_dir/aa7109e8a38c5a8268b487f9ffe0e848.png)

7.54 grams of ammonia were actually produced in this reaction.

## Lesson Summary {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-bux}

-   Chemical reactions can be studied in terms of the amounts of
    reactants that are present and the amount of products that
    are formed.
-   The balanced chemical equation describes the relative amounts of
    reactants and products that are consumed and generated by a given
    chemical process.
-   Reactants combine in fixed mole ratios.
-   The amount of each reactant needed to generate a certain amount of
    product can be determined with stoichiometric calculations.
-   In cases where one reactant is used up before the others, we can
    describe the reaction in terms of a limiting reactant and one or
    more excess reactants.
-   The actual and theoretical yields for a given reaction are often
    related by calculating a percent yield.
-   The reaction table method provides a way to organize the information
    needed to perform stoichiometry calculations and to answer
    quantitative questions about various chemical reactions.

## Lesson Review Questions {#12.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-nom}

1.  Urea (NH ~2~ ) ~2~ CO is prepared by reacting ammonia with carbon
    dioxide according to the following equation: 2NH ~3~ (g) + CO
    ~2~ (g) → (NH ~2~ ) ~2~ CO(aq) + H ~2~ O(l). In one experiment,
    637.2 g of NH ~3~ is allowed to react with 1142 g of CO ~2~ .
    1.  Which of the two reactants is the limiting reagent?
    2.  Calculate the mass of(NH ~2~ ) ~2~ CO that could theoretically
        be formed by this reaction.

2.  Hydrogen gas reacts explosively in the presence of oxygen to
    produce water.
    1.  Write the balanced chemical equation for this process.
    2.  If 1 mol of hydrogen gas and 1 mol of oxygen gas are placed in a
        container and ignited, how many moles of water will be produced?
    3.  Which will be the limiting reactant?
    4.  Which will be the excess reactant, and how much of the excess
        reactant will be left over?

3.  If 1.00 grams of hydrogen gas and 1.00 grams of oxygen gas are
    placed in a container and ignited:
    1.  Which will be the limiting reactant?
    2.  Which will be the excess reactant?
    3.  What is the theoretical yield for water?
    4.  If 0.96 g of water are actually produced, what is the percent
        yield for this process?

4.  Gaseous nitrogen and hydrogen react to form ammonia via the Haber
    process, which is represented by the following chemical equation: N
    ~2(g)~ + 3H ~2(g)~ → 2NH ~3(g)~
    1.  If you react 25.0 grams of hydrogen gas in the presence of
        excess nitrogen gas, how many grams of ammonia should be
        produced?
    2.  If you produced 140. grams of ammonia, what is the percent
        yield?

5.  Look back to Example 12.8. If you changed the recipe to 2 slices of
    cheese per sandwich, what would be the limiting reactant and excess
    reactant given the same reactant amounts as in the example?
6.  Magnesium reacts with nitrogen in the air to form magnesium nitride.
    1.  Write and balance the chemical equation.
    2.  What is the limiting reactant if 4.00 g of Mg are mixed with
        8.00 g of nitrogen?
    3.  What is the theoretical yield of magnesium nitride in grams?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#12.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-dvg}

-   The Copper Cycle:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jVFnzFmsZHk](watch?v=jVFnzFmsZHk)
-   Chemical reaction library:
    [http://jchemed.chem.wisc.edu](jchemed.chem.wisc.edu)
-   Stoichiometry general practice problems:
    [http://www.sciencegeek.net/Chemistry/taters/Unit4Stoichiometry.htm](Unit4Stoichiometry.htm)
-   Borror, D. (Ed.) (1960) Dictionary of word roots and combining
    forms: compiled from the Greek, Latin, and other languages, with
    special reference to biological terms and scientific names. Mayfield
    Publishing Co.
-   Watkins, S. F. (2003). Applying the Reaction Table Method for
    Chemical Reaction Problems (Stoichiometry and Equilibrium). Journal
    of Chemical Education, 80(6), 658-null. doi: 10.1021/ed080p658

## Points to Consider {#12.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-mtq}

1.  What are some factors that control whether or not the actual yield
    of a chemical reaction is 100%? What would it mean for a reaction
    yield to be less than 100%? More than 100%?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686125] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#12.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-b98}

1.  Martin Walker (User:Walkerma/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Lead(II)\_chloride.jpg](File:Lead(II)_chloride.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="13.html"></span>

# States of Matter {#13.html#x-ck12-U3RhdGVzIG9mIE1hdHRlcg..-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_13_files/20151009235256280499.jpeg)
</span>

So far, much of our study of the chemical world has focused on
investigating elements, compounds, and reactions. We have assessed the
characteristics of elements and studied how they combine through
chemical reactions to produce new compounds. Now, we are going to shift
our attention away from compounds and reactions and look at what happens
to matter when it changes state. We are going to study why substances
exist as solids, liquids, or gases. We are also going to look at what
takes place on the molecular level when matter changes state from one
form to another. As you might already imagine, some substances exist as
solids at room temperature, others exist as liquids, and still others
exist as gases. Life as we know it would be much different, for
instance, if water was solid at room temperature, or if oxygen and
carbon dioxide were liquid. This chapter will help us understand the
different states of matter.

^Mike\\ Cline.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:FireholeRiverOjoCalientiBend.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686127] -->

# The Kinetic-Molecular Theory of Gases {#13.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEtpbmV0aWMtTW9sZWN1bGFyIFRoZW9yeSBvZiBHYXNlcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-0s8}

-   Describe kinetic energy as it applies to molecules.
-   Explain how kinetic energy is related to the mass and velocity of
    a particle.
-   Describe the nature of elastic collisions and the implications for
    matter at the molecular level.
-   Describe the origins and assumptions of the kinetic-molecular
    theory, and use this model to describe the nature of matter at the
    molecular level.
-   Describe ideal behavior as it applies to a gas.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-r62}

-   **kinetic energy** : The energy associated with motion.
-   **elastic collision** : A collision in which momentum is conserved.
-   **kinetic-molecular theory** : Describes the molecular behavior of
    an ideal gas.
-   **ideal gas** : Gases that conform to the kinetic-molecular theory.

## Check Your Understanding {#13.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-ael}

-   What are the similarities and differences between different states
    of matter?

## Introduction {#13.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-gd6}

Ice, water, and steam appear quite differently to the eye. If you were
to look at these three states of matter on the molecular level, you
would see that the arrangement of molecules is very different here as
well. However, solids and liquids have definite volumes, unlike gases
which tend to take on the shape of their container. In this lesson, you
will learn about the unique behavior of gas particles on a molecular
level and the basis for kinetic molecular theory.

## States of Matter - A Microscopic View {#13.html#x-ck12-U3RhdGVzIG9mIE1hdHRlciAtIEEgTWljcm9zY29waWMgVmlldw..-fx1}

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-MTMwNWExM2RhNjI3MGIyODQzNGRkZjc2ZDczOTk2MzI.-mvh"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Workingclass91/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Liquid_chlorine_in_flask.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235256468760.jpeg)

**Figure 13.1**

Chlorine gas.

</div>

If we see matter at the macroscopic level, we can easily tell whether it
is solid, liquid, or gas. In **Figure**
[above](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMDItQ2hsb3JpbmU.) , we see a green
chlorine gas-liquid equilibrium. The various states of matter can
largely be explained by studying interactions between particles that
occur at the microscopic level. **Figure**
[below](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMDMtTW9sZWN1bGFy) shows how the
three states of matter differ on the molecular level.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-ZThjNjI0YWQ0NDZhM2E4OWRlY2FkOGIzYzUxN2NkNzU.-al5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of NASA" -->
<!-- @@url="http://exploration.grc.nasa.gov/education/rocket/state.html" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235256614175.png)

**Figure 13.2**

In this image, we see how atoms of argon interact in the solid, liquid,
and gas phases.

</div>

As we saw in our chapter on the mole, matter is ultimately composed of
particles. We cannot "see" individual molecules, but we can see the
effects exerted by the structure of each molecule on the behavior of the
bulk material. What accounts for the very different properties exhibited
by the same substance when it exists in different phases of matter? The
sizes and properties of individual atoms and molecules do not change
when a substance changes phase. Rather, it is the interactions between
particles that are changing.

### Liquids and Solids {#13.html#x-ck12-TGlxdWlkcyBhbmQgU29saWRz-f8x}

As shown in **Figure**
[above](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMDMtTW9sZWN1bGFy) , each state of
matter looks quite different at the molecular level. In the case of
liquids and solids, the distances between particles are negligible
relative to the size of each particle; they are essentially in direct
contact with one another. In liquids, particles are free to move and
exchange neighbors, resulting in the properties of a fluid. In solids,
they are rigidly fixed in space and held tightly to neighboring
particles.

### Gases {#13.html#x-ck12-R2FzZXM.-khv}

The story is quite different for gases. Gases take the shape of their
container, and they are relatively easy to compress. There are fewer gas
particles per unit volume than for the same substance in the liquid or
solid form. In fact, the liquid form of a given material is generally
several hundred times more dense than the gas form at normal pressures.
Despite the large amounts of empty space, a sample of a gas contains
many particles moving around, colliding and imparting force on their
surroundings. For example, in a one mole sample of gas at 0°C and 1 atm
of pressure, each cubic centimeter contains roughly 2.7 × 10 ^19^
molecules. Each molecule participates in several billion collisions
every second, moving only about 10-100 nanometers between collisions.
Additionally, these gas particles move at very high speeds. For example,
at 25°C, the average speed of hydrogen molecules in a sample of hydrogen
gas is 1960 m/s.

These are just some of the differences we see when we look at the
molecular level and study the different states for a particular chemical
species. The following simulation illustrates how particles behave over
time in the liquid, solid, and gas states:
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/states-of-matter](states-of-matter)
.

In this simulation, you can watch different types of molecules form a
solid, liquid, or gas. Add or remove heat to watch the phase change.
Change the temperature or volume of a container and see a
pressure-temperature diagram respond in real time.

One of the concepts shown by this animation is that particles are
constantly moving and vibrating. This is an important assumption that we
make when we study matter at the molecular level. Anything that is
moving and has mass also possesses some amount of **kinetic energy** ,
or the energy of motion. Kinetic energy increases as the molecular mass
increases and as the velocity of the particle increases.

Another thing we can see in this animation is that particles are
constantly colliding with one another. One assumption that we make when
talking about collisions between gas particles is that they are
completely elastic collisions. In an **elastic collision** , momentum is
conserved, which means that none of the kinetic energy of the colliding
particles is lost in some other form (such as the emission of light).
This makes sense, because if energy were lost in collisions, the speeds
of the particles would gradually decrease over time, and eventually
everything would condense down into a solid form.

## The Kinetic-Molecular Theory of Gases {#13.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEtpbmV0aWMtTW9sZWN1bGFyIFRoZW9yeSBvZiBHYXNlcw..-5ln}

Some of the observations and assumptions we just made about particle
behavior at the molecular level were proposed in independent works by
August Kroning (1856) and Rudolf Clausius’s 1857 work titled "the theory
of moving molecules." This work became the foundation of the
**kinetic-molecular theory** of gases. The kinetic-molecular theory of
gases makes the following assumptions:

1.  Gases are comprised of large numbers of particles that are in
    continuous, random motion and travel in straight lines.
2.  The volume of gas particles in a sample is extremely small compared
    to the total volume occupied by the gas.
3.  Attractive and repulsive forces between gas molecules
    are negligible.
4.  Energy can be transferred between molecules during collisions.
    Collisions are completely elastic.
5.  The average kinetic energy of the molecules is proportional to the
    temperature of the sample.
6.  Gases that conform to these assumptions are called **ideal gases** .

By applying these principles to gases, it is possible to show that the
properties of gases on the macroscopic level are a direct result of the
behavior of molecules on the microscopic level.

## Lesson Summary {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-tjz}

-   Differences between solids, liquids, and gases depend upon the
    interactions between the individual particles.
-   Kinetic energy is directly proportional to the mass and velocity of
    a particle; that is, as mass and/or velocity increase, so does the
    kinetic energy.
-   The kinetic-molecular theory describes the behavior of an ideal gas.
-   Assumptions of the kinetic-molecular theory include the following:
    -   Gas particles are in constant, random motion.
    -   The volume of gas particles is negligible in comparison to the
        volume of the container.
    -   There are no attractive forces between gas particles.
    -   Collisions of gas particles are elastic, so no energy is lost.
    -   The speed of a gas particle is directly proportional to the
        temperature of the system.

## Lesson Review Questions {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-cty}

1.  What do we mean when we say molecular view of matter? Can you draw a
    diagram to describe what particles might look like at the molecular
    level for solids, liquids, and gases?
2.  What is kinetic energy? Does kinetic energy increase or decrease as
    particle speed increases?
3.  Describe what is meant by an elastic collision. What would happen to
    particles over time if most collisions were not elastic?
4.  Summarize the major points of the kinetic-molecular theory.
5.  How are ideal gases and the kinetic-molecular theory related?
6.  Determine whether or not the following gases would be ideal; that
    is, do they fit the points of kinetic-molecular theory?
    1.  As a gas is heated, its particles start to move more slowly.
    2.  When one gas particle bumps into another, no energy is lost.
    3.  The gas particles follow predictable, circular paths within
        a container.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#13.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-83t}

-   Brenner, H. C. (1992). The kinetic molecular theory and the weighing
    of gas samples. Journal of Chemical Education, 69(7), 558-null. doi:
    10.1021/ed069p558
-   Hildebrand, J. H. (1963). An introduction to molecular kinetic
    theory - Selected topics in modern chemistry The University of
    California, Berkeley. New York: Reinhold Pub. Corp.
-   Timm, J. A. (1935). The kinetic-molecular theory and its relation to
    heat phenomena. Journal of Chemical Education, 12(1), 31-null. doi:
    10.1021/ed012p31
-   TedEd "The Invisible Properties of Gases":
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EHxdVtygP1g](watch?v=EHxdVtygP1g)

## Points to Consider {#13.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-bi6}

-   One of the assumptions of the kinetic-molecular theory is that
    collisions between particles are elastic – that momentum
    is conserved. Can you think of collisions you have witnessed in your
    everyday life that are completely elastic? Are collisions that you
    typically see elastic or not? Give examples.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686127] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686128] -->

# Liquids and Solids {#13.html#x-ck12-TGlxdWlkcyBhbmQgU29saWRz}

## Lesson Objectives {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-isv}

-   Compare and contrast the properties of liquids and solids both at
    the macroscopic level and at the molecular level.
-   Explain the concept of viscosity and give examples of substances
    that are more viscous and less viscous than water.
-   Define surface tension and vapor pressure.
-   List the four types of solid crystals based on how the particles are
    bonded together, and give examples of each.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-rsy}

-   **viscosity** : Measures a fluid’s resistance to flow.
-   **surface tension** : The amount of energy required to increase the
    surface area of a liquid.
-   **adhesion** : A liquid that displays more attraction between the
    liquid and the glass than attraction between the liquid particles.
-   **cohesion** : A liquid that that displays more attraction between
    the liquid particles than attraction between the liquid and the
    glass
-   **vapor pressure** : A measure of the pressure exerted by a gas
    above a liquid in a sealed container.
-   **crystalline solids** : Solid substances in which the arrangement
    of particles is highly ordered.

## Check Your Understanding {#13.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-elk}

-   Would particles in the solid, liquid, or gas phase have the greatest
    average kinetic energy?

## Introduction {#13.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-6sk}

You encounter solids and liquids in many forms in your everyday life.
Solids, unlike liquids, hold a definite shape. Both solids and liquids
hold a definite volume. However, on a molecular level, these two states
of matter are quite different. In this lesson we will introduce some of
the properties of liquids and solids that affect your interactions with
the substances all around you.

## Liquids {#13.html#x-ck12-TGlxdWlkcw.._1-hz5}

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-YzdjZGZkYjZmM2NlNzJmZTQ4MjlkMWVhZTY0ZWM4NWU.-owd"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Flickr:p.Gordon" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/pgordon/4097094562/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235256737007.jpeg)

**Figure 13.3**

In this image, you see small pools of elemental mercury. The Latin name
for mercury is hydrargyrum, a compound word meaning “water-silver”
(hydr- = water, -argyros = silver), since it is liquid like water but
shiny like silver. Mercury is the only pure metal that exists as a
liquid at room temperature.

</div>

Liquids have a definite volume, but no definite shape. A gallon of milk
will keep the same volume whether it is stored in a one-gallon milk jug
or a ten-gallon barrel. The volume is the same, but the fluid will
either fill the jug or spread out over the bottom of the barrel.

### Intermolecular Forces in Liquids {#13.html#x-ck12-SW50ZXJtb2xlY3VsYXIgRm9yY2VzIGluIExpcXVpZHM._1-m4z}

Molecules in the liquid state are held in close proximity to one another
by intermolecular forces. Any molecule containing an –OH group (such as
water and the various alcohols) will form hydrogen bonds with adjacent
molecules, causing a group of molecules to take on the liquid state. A
polar molecule like CH ~2~ Cl ~2~ cannot form hydrogen bonds, but
molecules are held together in the liquid state by dipole-dipole
interactions. Br ~2~ is not polar, but interactions with other Br ~2~
molecules through dispersion forces cause Br ~2~ to be a liquid at room
temperature as well. Intermolecular forces are also responsible for
various properties of liquids, such as viscosity, surface tension, and
vapor pressure.

### Viscosity {#13.html#x-ck12-VmlzY29zaXR5_1-fgp}

**Viscosity** measures a fluid’s resistance to flow – the higher the
viscosity, the slower the flow of the material. One factor that affects
viscosity is the strength of the intermolecular forces in the material.
Molecules that exhibit higher intermolecular forces tend to have higher
viscosities. Temperature also influences viscosity. A higher temperature
results in a decrease in viscosity, since molecules are moving faster
and the intermolecular forces are more easily disrupted. Most cooking
oils are more viscous than water, but when heated, the viscosity
decreases and the oil spreads more easily. Motor oils are ranked by
viscosity. Lower viscosity oils provide less drag on the engine, but
they are also used up faster than a higher-viscosity material.

### Surface Tension {#13.html#x-ck12-U3VyZmFjZSBUZW5zaW9u_1-1pj}

**Surface tension** is a physical property of liquids that is caused by
the attraction of liquid molecules due to various intermolecular forces.
This property is allows the surface of a liquid to resist an external
force, and is a measure of the amount of energy required to increase the
surface area of a liquid. Surface tension is basically a measure of the
“pull” of surface molecules on one another.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-ODBhYjMyMzE3N2JkOWZhMDIxYjU3MGJmYmZkOGY3OGE.-zvx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Booyabazooka/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wassermolek%C3%BCleInTr%C3%B6pfchen.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235256843744.png)

**Figure 13.4**

</div>

Intermolecular forces on a molecule in the interior of a liquid are
exerted in all directions. The forces on a surface molecule are more
directional, causing the molecule to be pulled toward other surface
molecules and down toward the interior of the liquid. This property has
consequences both for the behavior of the liquid in contact with solids
and the influence of temperature on the liquid.

A liquid that can interact with glass displays the property of
**adhesion** . The attraction of the glass to the molecules is stronger
than the attraction of the liquid molecules to each other. The liquid
molecules are pulled up due to their stronger attraction to the glass.
Water is one liquid that displays this property.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-OTI4ODMzNWFlMzQwM2UyNzA0YjIzZjQwNDI1NTU3Zjc.-dlr"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Karlhahn/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ConcaveMeniscusContactAngle.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235257013179.png)

**Figure 13.5**

</div>

Some liquids, such as mercury, display more attraction between the
liquid particles than attraction between the liquid and the glass. This
is known as **cohesion** . The pull between the liquid particles is
stronger, so the liquid pulls away from the glass.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-ZTIzOTVjYjNmY2FiYmMxNWZkZDQyZjdlYmNlZWI1Nzg.-gvs"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Karlhahn/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ConvexMeniscusContactAngle.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235257146114.png)

**Figure 13.6**

</div>

### Vapor Pressure {#13.html#x-ck12-VmFwb3IgUHJlc3N1cmU._1-rf9}

**Vapor pressure** is a measure of the pressure exerted by a gas above a
liquid in a sealed container. While viscosity and surface tension
increase as the strength of intermolecular forces increase, vapor
pressure *decreases* . This is because the stronger the intermolecular
forces are, the harder it is for liquid molecules to escape into the gas
phase. Vapor pressure a measure of how much of a substance is in the gas
phase when that substance is at equilibrium; that is, the number of
molecules in the gas and liquid phases are not changing. The more
molecules that are able to escape into the gas phase, the higher the
vapor pressure. Vapor pressure is also proportional to temperature. As
temperature increases, vapor pressure also increases.

## Solids {#13.html#x-ck12-U29saWRz_1-jzv}

Solids are materials that have both a defined shape and a defined
volume. They do not take on the shape of their container, as liquids and
gases do. Solids can be either amorphous or crystalline. Amorphous
solids (such as glass) do not have a well organized three-dimensional
arrangement of molecules or atoms, so they lack a high level of order.
On the other hand, **crystalline solids** display a highly ordered and
predictable three-dimensional structure. In this section we will discuss
the different types of crystalline solids.

### Types of Solids {#13.html#x-ck12-VHlwZXMgb2YgU29saWRz_1-tbq}

Solids can be categorized by the forces holding the individual atoms,
ions, or molecules together. The **Table**
[below](#13.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MTMuMQ..) summarizes the properties of
different solids:

  **Type**    **Connecting Forces**   **Properties**                                          **Examples**
  ----------- ----------------------- ------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
  ionic       ionic bonds             brittle, high melting points, poor conductors           NaCl, LiBr
  molecular   intermolecular forces   soft, low melting points, poor conductors               water, glucose
  covalent    covalent bonds          hard, high melting points, poor conductors              diamond, quartz
  metallic    metallic bonds          variable hardness and melting points, good conductors   Cu, Fe, other metals

Ionic crystals have very strong interactions between individual
particles, due to the electrostatic attraction between oppositely
charged ions. This is reflected in the very high melting points of most
ionic solids. The shape of the solid depends upon the relative sizes of
the ions and the ratio of cations to anions. Although ionic substances
are poor conductors in the solid state, the ions become mobile upon
melting, and the resulting liquid is a very good conductor of
electricity.

Molecular solids are held together by weak dispersion forces or other
polar interactions. Because these are based on attractions between
partial charges, they are not as strong as ionic forces. Due to the
weaker forces involved, this class of solids will melt at much lower
temperatures than ionic crystals.

Covalent solids are composed of atoms connected by covalent bonds in a
three-dimensional network. This extensive series of strong connections
produces a very stable structure that is not affected much by changes in
temperature. The hardness and stability of diamond is a reflection of
the many strong carbon-carbon bonds that form its covalent network.

Metallic solids are composed entirely of metallic atoms. In other solid
structures, the electrons involved in bonding tend to be localized, or
fixed in place in the covalent bonds. However, the electrons in metallic
bonds are delocalized over the entire crystal. The fact that the
electrons are free to move between different atoms causes metallic
solids to be very good conductors of electricity.

Crystalline solids can also be characterized by their shape. The
**Table** [below](#13.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6SW50Q2gtMTMtMTctQ3J5c3RhbHM.)
illustrates some of the common crystal forms. The crystal shapes are
determined by the type and arrangement of the individual atoms, ions, or
molecules from which they are constructed.

<div id="13.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6SW50Q2gtMTMtMTctQ3J5c3RhbHM.">

[![](images/table.png)](table_13-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-cuz}

-   At the molecular level, the major difference between solids and
    liquids is based on how freely the particles can move within
    the substance.
-   Viscosity measures a liquid's resistance to flow.
-   Surface tension results from the directional pull on surface
    molecules towards the interior of a liquid.
-   Adhesion and cohesion are demonstrated by liquids as they interact
    with the surface of a container.
-   Vapor pressure is the pressure resulting from the gas molecules
    above a liquid in a closed container at equilibrium.
-   Ionic, molecular, covalent, and metallic solids are characterized by
    the types of bonds holding the substance's particles together in the
    solid form.

## Lesson Review Questions {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-ice}

1.  Define viscosity. Give an example of how temperature
    influences viscosity.
2.  Define surface tension. Would you expect water to have a stronger or
    weaker surface tension than olive oil?
3.  Draw a picture of a liquid displaying adhesion and a liquid
    displaying cohesion in a glass jar.
4.  What does vapor pressure measures? Does vapor pressure increase or
    decrease as intermolecular forces when intermolecular forces grow
    stronger?
5.  What distinguishes crystalline and amorphous solids?
6.  List and define the four different types of crystalline solids.
7.  Order the four types of crystalline solids from lowest to highest
    melting point.
8.  Research to find one example for each type of crystalline solid,
    different from those provided in the text.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#13.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-s9r}

-   Surface tension – “sticky water”:
    [http://www.exploratorium.edu/ronh/bubbles/sticky\_water.html](sticky_water.html)
-   Types of solids:
    [http://chemistry.about.com/od/matter/a/Types-Of-Solids.htm](Types-Of-Solids.htm)
-   Identifying states of matter:
    [http://www.edinformatics.com/math\_science/states\_of\_matter.htm](states_of_matter.htm)
-   Adhesion and cohesion, in space!:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oAY3yISf-24](watch?v=oAY3yISf-24)

## Points to Consider {#13.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-hav}

-   In this lesson, we studied the differences between liquids and
    solids at the molecular level. As we will see, these differences can
    be accounted for by looking at the amount of energy within a
    given system.
-   How do you suppose pressure might affect particles at the molecular
    level in terms of the phase that a given substance exhibits?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686128] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686129] -->

# Changes of State {#13.html#x-ck12-Q2hhbmdlcyBvZiBTdGF0ZQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-ju7}

-   Describe how the phase of a material is affected by changes in
    the temperature.
-   Describe how the phase of a material is affected by changes
    in pressure.
-   Draw phase diagrams to relate the pressure, temperature, and the
    phase of a substance.
-   Describe the energy changes associated with changes of state.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-e1r}

-   **heating curve** : A curve where supplying heat to a solid
    substance will gradually raise its temperature, and eventually, it
    will melt.
-   **melting point** : The temperature of a point where heat is used to
    break up the attractive forces holding them rigidly in place.
-   **boiling point** : The temperature of a point where particles start
    to enter the gas phase.
-   **phase diagram** : A plot of temperature vs. pressure that
    indicates the states of matter present at each point.
-   **triple point** : A point where all three states can
    exist simultaneously.

## Check Your Understanding {#13.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-wd6}

1.  Compare and contrast the properties of liquids, solids, and gases.
2.  Which of the following statements about solids and liquids are true?
    (There may be more than one.)
    1.  Solids and liquids are virtually incompressible; their volume
        is constant.
    2.  Solids are typically more dense than liquids.
    3.  All liquids have the same density.

## Introduction {#13.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-pt0}

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-OWIxMjg5MDNkZGQ2ZWRlYzA2ZTQ4ZjI1ZGNhNWE2MDg.-y7k"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Alina G, 2014" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235258388885.jpeg)

**Figure 13.7**

</div>

In the last lesson, we studied the characteristics of liquids and solids
at a macroscopic level and at the molecular level. Increasing the
temperature of a solid transforms the particles from a rigid arrangement
to a fluid (a liquid or gas). Conversely, decreasing the temperature of
a liquid or gas slows the particles down, going back from free movement
to a fixed arrangement. In this section, we will further explore how
temperature and pressure affect the characteristics and behavior of
matter. Pressure has a larger effect on gases, which are very
compressible, than liquids and solids. However, changes in pressure are
still relevant to solids and liquids. For example, **Figure**
[above](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMDktU2thdGVz) shows ice skates on
ice. Because your entire weight is all concentrated on a thin blade, ice
skates exert quite a bit of pressure on the ice below them. An
interesting property of water is that increasing the pressure on its
solid form (ice) will eventually convert it to liquid water. The
pressure exerted by ice skates makes small amounts of liquid water on
the surface, allowing the skates to glide smoothly.

## Heating Curves {#13.html#x-ck12-SGVhdGluZyBDdXJ2ZXM._2-tog}

Supplying heat to a solid substance will gradually raise its
temperature, and eventually, it will melt. Heating the resulting liquid
will cause a further increase in temperature until the liquid begins to
boil. If we were to graph the temperature of a substance against the
amount of heat added, it would look something like the **Figure**
[below](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMTAtSGVhdGluZw..) .

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-Yzk1NGU5MzYyYTY1OTFkNGU5M2YyODIzMTAyYjMyNDg.-koy"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235258536870.png)

**Figure 13.8**

Heating curve depicting phase changes between the solid, liquid, and gas
forms of a given substance.

</div>

The **Figure** [above](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMTAtSGVhdGluZw..) is
referred to as a **heating curve** . The most notable feature is that
the temperature rise is not steady; there are plateaus during which heat
is being added, but the temperature is not increasing. What is happening
here? Let's start with the first slope on the left. At this point, the
substance is in its solid form. Adding heat causes the particles to move
faster. Faster particles means more kinetic energy, which also means a
higher temperature. At the first plateau, the vibrations of the
particles become energetic enough to break free of the rigid solid form,
and the substance converts to a liquid. Heat continues to be added, but
instead of increasing the kinetic energy of the particles, it is used to
break up the attractive forces holding them rigidly in place. This
process is known as melting, and the temperature at which it occurs is
the **melting point** . Because the added heat is used to break up
attractive forces instead of adding to the kinetic energy of the
particles, the temperature of the material stays constant until the
phase change is completed.

Further heating then adds energy to the liquid particles, increasing
their speed, kinetic energy, and temperature. This is the second slope
on the curve. Once the particles are energetic enough to completely
break free of each other, they start to enter the gas phase. Boiling
occurs at the second plateau of this curve, and the temperature at this
point is referred to as the **boiling point** . Again, the added heat is
being used to break up the interactions between particles instead of
increasing their kinetic energy, so no temperature increase is observed
until all particles are in the gas phase. Finally, adding even more
energy will further speed up the gas particles, increasing the kinetic
energy and temperature of the substance.

The reverse process can also be diagrammed, where we start with a gas
and gradually remove heat until it condenses to a liquid and then
freezes into a solid. For a given amount of a certain substance at a
given pressure, heating and cooling curves should be mirror images. The
melting point will be equal to the freezing point, and the boiling point
will be equal to the condensation point. Additionally, the amount of
heat added to completely melt the sample is the same as the amount that
must be removed to completely freeze it.

Two other changes of state can occur under at appropriate pressures. The
direct conversion of a solid to a gas without becoming a liquid is
called sublimation. The reverse process (gas to solid) is known as
deposition. Depositions of hot metal vapors are often used in the
electronics industry to produce thin films of metal on solid bases. Most
substances require reduced pressures (less than one atmosphere) for
these processes to occur. At higher pressures, substances would
transition through the liquid phase. However, some materials, such as
carbon dioxide, will sublime even at standard pressure. Iodine and
naphthalene (found in mothballs) are other substances that can sublime
at only slightly reduced pressures.

The **Figure** [below](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMTEtQ29vbGluZw..)
summarizes the different processes involved in phase changes.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-NDcyMzljNGM1YzRkMWRmZTg3OTNhZjM5MTRhNWIzMzg.-h7z"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235258647575.png)

**Figure 13.9**

Summary of phase changes.

</div>

## Phase Diagrams {#13.html#x-ck12-UGhhc2UgRGlhZ3JhbXM._2-krq}

Both temperature and pressure have an effect on the phase in which a
given substance exists. A plot of temperature vs. pressure that
indicates the states of matter present at each point is known as a
**phase diagram** . **Figure**
[below](#13.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTMtMTMtUGhhc2UtRGlhZ3JhbQ..) shows the
phase diagram for water.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-ipo"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235258804103.png)

**Figure 13.10**

</div>

The lines on this diagram show the boundaries between the three states
of matter for water. Notice that there is one point where all three
states can exist simultaneously; this is called the **triple point** .
Also look at the slope of the solid-liquid boundary. For most
substances, this line has a positive slope, which means that increasing
the pressure of a liquid will eventually form a solid. Water is unusual
in that it has a negative slope for this boundary. This has to do with
the fact that the liquid form of water is more dense than the solid form
(ice). As a result, putting large amounts of pressure on ice at a given
temperature will cause it to melt. We already discussed this phenomenon
at the beginning of the lesson in the context of ice skating. The phase
diagram gives us a more detailed way to look at this occurrence.

**Example 13.1**

A pressure cooker operates by keeping water in its liquid form at
temperatures above its normal boiling point. Can you use the phase
diagram to explain this behavior?

*Answer:*

The pressure cooker maintains a pressure that is above one atmosphere.
At this higher pressure, the boundary between the liquid and gaseous
forms of water occurs at a higher temperature.

<div
id="13.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-az9"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_13_files/20151009235258964066.png)

**Figure 13.11**

</div>

If we look at the phase diagram for carbon dioxide, we can see that its
triple point occurs at approximately 5 atm and -56°C. Below this
pressure, liquid CO ~2~ cannot exist. At one atmosphere of pressure,
only the solid and gas forms are possible, which explains why solid CO
~2~ sublimes instead of melting at standard pressures. Also note that
the solid-liquid boundary has a positive slope, which is normal for most
substances.

**Example 13.2**

Why solid CO ~2~ is called dry ice? Use the phase diagram to explain.

*Answer:*

Solid CO ~2~ exists at temperatures below -78°C at the standard pressure
of 1 atm. When solid CO ~2~ is allowed to warm to room temperature at
this pressure, the solid changes to a gas without going through the
liquid form. Because it does not become a liquid, it is considered
"dry."

## Lesson Summary {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-fcn}

-   Phase transitions occur as heat is added or removed from
    a substance.
-   The solid to liquid transition is called melting.
-   The liquid to gas transition is called boiling.
-   Sublimation and deposition involve direct transitions between solid
    and gas without going through the liquid state.
-   A phase diagram gives information about the conditions under which a
    material can exist as a solid, a liquid, or a gas.

## Lesson Review Questions {#13.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-gc7}

1.  The following heating curve of an unknown substance shows several
    phase changes that take place as heat is added. Label each section
    indicated by a number. <span class="x-ck12-img-inline">
    <!-- @@author="" --> <!-- @@license="" -->
    ![](ck12_13_files/20151009235259078589.png) </span>
2.  What would happen if you tried to make an ice rink using dry ice?
    Would you be able to skate? Compare the phase diagrams of water and
    dry ice to justify your answer.
3.  What would you see if you were to observe water at its triple point?
4.  Referring to the phase diagram of water, what phases can exist at a
    temperature of 0°C and a pressure of 0.006 atm?
5.  Referring to the phase diagram for CO ~2~ , at what temperature must
    liquid CO ~2~ exist if the pressure is 100 atm?
6.  What temperature must carbon dioxide be in order to remain solid at
    7 atmospheres of pressure? Would it melt or sublime at this
    pressure?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#13.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-ih4}

-   Observe the triple point of an organic compound, tert-Butyl alcohol:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLRqpJN9zeA](watch?v=BLRqpJN9zeA)
-   Materials and their properties:
    [http://www.abpischools.org.uk/resources/solids-liquids-gases/index.asp](index.asp)
-   Review on matter and change of state:
    [http://www.chem4kids.com/files/matter\_intro.html](matter_intro.html)

## Points to Consider {#13.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-btj}

-   Can you think of some substances commonly encountered in their
    gaseous state?
-   How might you check for the presence of a gas?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686129] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#13.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-qhd}

1.  User:Workingclass91/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Liquid\_chlorine\_in\_flask.jpg](File:Liquid_chlorine_in_flask.jpg) .
    CC BY 3.0
2.  Courtesy of NASA.
    [http://exploration.grc.nasa.gov/education/rocket/state.html](state.html) .
    Public Domain
3.  Flickr:p.Gordon.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/pgordon/4097094562/]() . CC BY 2.0
4.  User:Booyabazooka/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wassermolek%C3%BCleInTr%C3%B6pfchen.svg](File:Wassermolek%C3%BCleInTr%C3%B6pfchen.svg) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Karlhahn/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ConcaveMeniscusContactAngle.png](File:ConcaveMeniscusContactAngle.png) .
    Public Domain
6.  User:Karlhahn/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ConvexMeniscusContactAngle.png](File:ConvexMeniscusContactAngle.png) .
    Public Domain
7.  Image copyright Alina G, 2014.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
8.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
9.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
10. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
11. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0

<span id="14.html"></span>

# The Properties of Gases {#14.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFByb3BlcnRpZXMgb2YgR2FzZXM.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_14_files/20151009235306635835.jpeg)
</span>

When the weather is right, you might see a brightly colored balloon
floating far above you. The technology that goes into a hot air balloon
is one that we may not pay much attention to these days. It works by
trapping hot gases in a container that remains upright over time. It is
the oldest human-carrying flight technology and is still used today for
many important applications, such as weather monitoring. In this
chapter, we are going to study the properties of gases and the effects
that altering one of these properties has on various others.

^Flickr:ricketyus.\\ www.flickr.com/photos/rickety/5046978783/.\\ CC\\ BY\\ 2.0.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686131] -->

# Gas Properties {#14.html#x-ck12-R2FzIFByb3BlcnRpZXM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-2r7}

-   List some substances that are gases at 25°C and some characteristics
    that they have in common.
-   Define and give examples of diatomic gases.
-   Describe how pressure is measured, and be able to carry out
    conversions between different units of pressure.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-sif}

-   **diatomic gas** : Any two-atom molecules that exist in the gas
    phase around room temperature.
-   **pressure** : A measure of the total amount of force divided by the
    surface area over which it is exerted.
-   **barometer** : An instrument used to measure pressure.
-   **atmospheric pressure** : The pressure exerted by the weight of the
    atmosphere at a given altitude.
-   **millimeters of mercury (mm Hg)** : A common unit of pressure
    originating from the mercury barometer.
-   **torr** : A unit of pressure equal to mm Hg named after Italian
    physicist Evangelista Torricelli.

## Check Your Understanding {#14.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-vbd}

1.  What evidence might there be to demonstrate the presence of gases in
    our atmosphere?
2.  Can you think of examples from your life suggesting that there are
    gases we depend on for survival?

## Introduction {#14.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-q8e}

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-OTAwYmE1YzI5NTg0YjNhOTQ1MDQxNDZmM2M1MWQyYjg.-zvj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nitrogen-glow.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235306785633.jpeg)

**Figure 14.1**

Nitrogen gas lamp.

</div>

**Figure** [above](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMDItTml0cm9nZW4tTGFtcA..)
shows a nitrogen gas discharge lamp, where nitrogen gas is energized to
produce light that appears lavender in color. Nitrogen gas is the most
abundant gas on Earth. However, despite the fact that approximately 78%
of the air we breathe is nitrogen, we may hardly notice it as we
navigate our daily lives. Although nitrogen-containing compounds have
been known since ancient times, pure elemental nitrogen in its gaseous
form was not discovered until 1772, by Daniel Rutherford. This
discovery, along with Joseph Priestley’s discovery of oxygen in 1774,
greatly influenced our modern understanding of gases and matter in
general.

Nitrogen has a melting point of -210°C and a boiling point of -196°C. It
is colorless, odorless, tasteless, and fairly unreactive at normal
temperatures and pressures. It exists as N ~2~ molecules, in which two
nitrogen atoms are held together by a strong triple covalent bond. Its
lack of reactivity is derived from the large amount of energy that would
be required to break this bond. Nitrogen is an example of a **diatomic
gas** , which refers to any two-atom molecules that exist in the gas
phase around room temperature.

In this lesson, we are going to study some properties exhibited by
gases, with a special focus on the pressure they exert and how pressure
is measured.

## Physical Characteristics of Gases {#14.html#x-ck12-UGh5c2ljYWwgQ2hhcmFjdGVyaXN0aWNzIG9mIEdhc2Vz-lmq}

All matter, under the right conditions, can exist in a gaseous state.
Some substances, such as carbon dioxide, oxygen, and nitrogen, exist as
gases at room temperature under standard atmospheric pressure. Gases
have the following characteristics:

1.  **Gases assume the volume and shape of their container.** When
    placed in a container of any size and shape, the gas molecules will
    quickly distribute themselves evenly throughout the container.
2.  **Gases are compressible.** The volume and pressure of a particular
    sample of gas can fluctuate greatly simply by changing the size of
    its container.
3.  **Gases mix homogeneously when confined to same container.** When
    several gases are added to a container, the individual gas particles
    mix freely, forming a homogeneous mixture in which each type of gas
    is randomly distributed throughout all the available volume.
4.  **Gases have much lower densities than liquids and solids.** For
    example, liquid water is over 1000 times more dense than water vapor
    at STP.

The following simulation demonstrates the properties of gases listed
above:
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/states-of-matter](states-of-matter)
.

## Pressure {#14.html#x-ck12-UHJlc3N1cmU.-byh}

According to the kinetic-molecular theory, momentum is conserved in
collisions between particles at the molecular level. The same can be
assumed to be true for collisions between gaseous particles and the wall
of their container

In the chapter opener, we saw a hot air balloon traveling through the
air. The walls of the balloon are pushed outward by the hot air inside.
On the molecular level, this outward force is due to countless tiny
collisions between gas molecules and the walls of the balloon.
**Pressure** is a measure of the total amount of force divided by the
surface area over which it is exerted. If the total force of the
collisions inside the balloon is greater than the force of collisions
exerted by the atmosphere on the outer surface of the balloon, it will
expand. Equivalently, if the pressure inside the balloon is higher than
the pressure outside, the balloon will expand.

Pressure can be measured with an instrument called a **barometer** (
**Figure** [below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMDMtQmFyb21ldGVy) ).

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-YzMzNmJlZjhhZDE2NDZiZjBjNjQwN2NhYzRjOTU2ZDA.-7t9"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Danomagnum/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MercuryBarometer.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235306902472.png)

**Figure 14.2**

Diagram of a mercury barometer.

</div>

The word barometer comes from the Greek roots *baro* , meaning
*pressure* , and *–meter* , meaning to *measure* . Evangelista
Torricelli (1608-1647) is credited with inventing the barometer in 1644.
The invention consisted of a mercury-filled container attached to a
glass tube into which mercury flowed. As shown in **Figure**
[above](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMDMtQmFyb21ldGVy) , atmospheric
gases exert a downward force on the fluid reservoir, and the fluid rises
in the tube. The height of the fluid is one way to measure **atmospheric
pressure** . If the tube is connected to an enclosed sample of gas
instead of open to the atmosphere, the fluid will change height to a
different level that is proportional to the pressure of the sample.
Because this was one of the first standardized ways to measure pressure,
**millimeters of mercury (mm Hg)** is actually a common unit of
pressure. This unit is also sometimes referred to as a **torr** , short
for Torricelli. Standard atmospheric pressure (1 atm) is defined as 760
mm Hg, which is approximately equal to the average atmospheric pressure
at sea level. The SI unit for pressure is the Pascal, where (1 Pascal =
1 newton/m ^2^ ). Because this is such a small unit, kilopascals (kPa)
are also commonly used. The relationships between various units of
pressure are shown below:

1 atm = 1.01325 bar = 101.325 kPa = 760 mm Hg = 760 torr = 29.92 in Hg =
14.696 psi

**Example 14.1**

The pressure in a bicycle tire is measured to be 46 psi at room
temperature. What is this pressure in atm?

![46 \\ \\text{psi} \\times \\frac{1\\ \\text{atm}}{14.7\\
\\text{psi}}=3.1\\
\\text{atm}](ck12_math_images_dir/9529d4b2b7b02a2d1c7a615bd1cf391d.png)

### Atmospheric Pressure {#14.html#x-ck12-QXRtb3NwaGVyaWMgUHJlc3N1cmU.-nie}

**Atmospheric pressure** can be thought of as the force exerted by a
hypothetical column of gas that stretches from sea level to the outer
reaches of the atmosphere. If we divide the total weight of the air in
the column (the force) by the area that it is pressing down on, we get a
pressure of about 1 atm. **Figure**
[below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMDQtQXRtb3NwaGVyaWMtUHJlc3N1cmU.)
illustrates this type of calculation.

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-NWU0ZTQ0YmQwYTMyNGY2ZjI5MGQ5ZDQ3ZDMwOTNhZmM.-3bd"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So, using world map clip art by Jenny Boyd" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation (clip art available at http://www.clker.com/clipart-world-map-32.html)" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0 (clip art in public domain)" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307064624.png)

**Figure 14.3**

Illustration of atmospheric pressure

</div>

If we go up in altitude, there is less air in between the ground and the
edge of the atmosphere. The smaller amount of force means that
atmospheric pressure is lower at higher altitudes (see **Figure**
[below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMDUtUHJlc3N1cmUtQWx0aXR1ZGU.) ).

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-NGQ5NTcyNjBlNjJjNjczY2JiODJlZDg2NWQxMGQ5NGU.-gvf"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307270716.jpeg)

**Figure 14.4**

This is a pressure vs. altitude curve that displays altitude in
kilometers on the left axis and miles on the right. Pressure is reported
in millibars (mb) on the bottom or inches of mercury (in Hg) on the top.

</div>

As shown here, pressure decreases to less than 25% of ground-level
atmospheric pressure when we get to an altitude of about six miles.
Since this is a common cruising altitude for commercial airplanes,
pressurized cabins are needed for the comfort and survival of the
passengers. This is because the density of the air decreases along with
the decreasing air pressure, so there is less oxygen in a breath of air.
You've probably noticed this effect in high-mountain areas, as it often
feels harder to breath.

**Example 14.2**

If you were to ascend from sea level to the top of a 10,000-foot high
mountain (about 2 miles), what would the atmospheric pressure be? What
percent of standard atmospheric pressure is this value?

*Answer:*

*Looking at the altitude-pressure curve above, we can see that the
pressure would be approximately 500 mb. Since the pressure at sea level
is 1000 mb, the new atmospheric pressure would be 500/1000 × 100% = 50%
of the standard atmospheric pressure.*

## Lesson Summary {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-m1y}

-   Gases assume the shape of their container.
-   Gases are compressible.
-   Gas particles demonstrate elastic collisions between themselves and
    with container walls.
-   Pressure is equal to force/area.
-   Atmospheric pressure can be measured with a barometer.
-   Atmospheric pressure at sea level is 14.7 psi (1 atm) at 25°C.
-   Atmospheric pressure decreases as the altitude increases.

## Lesson Review Questions {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-a4n}

1.  Why do you suppose the pressure of atmospheric gases increases with
    proximity to earth? Why aren’t the gases evenly distributed
    throughout the entire reaches of the atmosphere? Study the PhET
    simulation for further illustration here:
    [http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/states-of-matter](states-of-matter) .
2.  Draw a diagram showing how particles exert pressure on the wall of
    a container.
3.  If you were to double the pressure of the bicycle tire from 46 psi
    to 92 psi, what would be the new pressure in atm?
4.  The average atmospheric pressure in Denver is 0.830 atm. Express
    this pressure in mm Hg.
5.  Convert a pressure of 570. torr to atmospheres.
6.  Convert 8.5 psi to torr.

## Further Reading/Supplemental Links {#14.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhbCBMaW5rcw..-e5z}

-   Weeks, M. E. (1934). Daniel Rutherford and the discovery
    of nitrogen. Journal of Chemical Education, 11(2), 101. doi:
    10.1021/ed011p101
-   Properties of gases:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/ch4/properties2.html](properties2.html)
-   Review of air pressure:
    [http://kids.earth.nasa.gov/archive/air\_pressure/]()

## Points to Consider {#14.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-oel}

-   In this lesson we studied gas pressure and how it is measured. How
    do you think pressure is affected by changes in temperature, amount
    of gas, and volume?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686131] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686132] -->

# Gas Laws {#14.html#x-ck12-R2FzIExhd3M.}

## Lesson Objectives {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-rhz}

-   Describe various observed relationships between the pressure,
    volume, temperature, and amount of a gas, including Boyle’s law,
    Charles’s law, Gay-Lussac’s law, and Avogadro’s law. Be able to
    perform calculations using these relationships.
-   Be able to derive a combined gas law, and utilize this expression to
    calculate volume, temperature, and pressure changes in gas systems.
-   Describe the ideal gas equation PV=nRT and perform calculations
    using this relationship.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-nbr}

-   **Boyle’s Law** : States that for a fixed amount of gas at a
    constant temperature, the volume occupied is inversely proportional
    to its pressure.
-   **absolute zero** : The lower limit for possible temperatures, a
    value of 0 Kelvin or -273°C.
-   **Charles’s Law** : States that for a fixed amount of gas at a
    constant pressure, the volume is directly proportional to its
    absolute temperature.
-   **Gay-Lussac’s Law** : States that pressure is directly proportional
    to the absolute temperature.
-   **Avogadro's Law** : Stats that if you compare two samples of an
    ideal gas at the same temperature, pressure, and volume, they
    contain the same number of molecules.
-   **ideal gas law** : The equation of state that describes the
    relationship between temperature, pressure, volume, and amount of an
    ideal gas. Derived from a combination of Boyle's, Charles's,
    Gay-Lussac's and Avogadro's gas laws.

## Check Your Understanding {#14.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-udf}

-   One of the earliest air pumps was made by Robert Boyle. The figure
    below is a diagram of his early pump.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307412982.png)
</span>

What do you suppose the relationship is between pressure and volume as
shown here?

## Introduction {#14.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-zne}

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-MDgzZTVlNzdjY2NhYjFhZjY5ODlkZjg5YjgyNDNhODU.-yag"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Rhett Maxwell" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/rhettmaxwell/2443185091/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307522887.jpeg)

**Figure 14.5**

Soap bubble in flight.

</div>

In the last lesson, we studied the properties and characteristics of
gases. Many of these properties can be explained by the fact that gases
are mostly empty space but contain large numbers of particles with
certain masses and velocities. Now we are going to study how gases
behave when exposed to changes in temperature, pressure, and volume. We
will also see how the development of instruments that measure pressure
and temperature led to new discoveries in our understanding of gases.
The origins of the absolute temperature scale will be discussed, and we
will examine the empirical relationships between volume, temperature,
pressure, and amount that were discovered by early chemists.

## Boyle's Law: Pressure vs. Volume {#14.html#x-ck12-Qm95bGUncyBMYXc6IFByZXNzdXJlIHZzLiBWb2x1bWU._1-trm}

With the development of the barometer in 1644 came a series of
experiments and investigations aimed at understanding the nature of
gases. Robert Boyle (1627-1691) was particularly interested in the
relationships between the volume occupied by a sample of gas and the
pressure it exerted on its container. He invented one of the earliest
air pumps, which allowed him to create low-pressure environments. Boyle
devised experiments to study the pressure-volume relationship. For
example, he observed that reducing the volume of a balloon by half
doubles its volume. In other words, volume is inversely proportional to
pressure (V ∝ 1/P).

For a fixed amount of gas at a constant temperature, the volume occupied
is inversely proportional to its pressure. Stated mathematically, the
product of the pressure and volume is equal to a constant:

![P \\times V =
k](ck12_math_images_dir/e52441dfa583b658b3a225b11ef10121.png)

where *k* is a constant that depends on the temperature and amount of
the gas in a given sample. This observation was published in 1662 and is
now known as **Boyle’s Law** .

This equation can be used to quantitatively predict how changes in
pressure will affect the volume of a sample, and vice versa. Let's
assume that a sample of gas undergoes a change to one of these variables
while the temperature and amount are held constant. The initial pressure
(P ~1~ ) and the initial volume (V ~1~ ) can be related to the final
pressure (P ~2~ ) and the final volume (P ~2~ ) as follows:

![P\_1 \\times V\_1 =
k](ck12_math_images_dir/c0c59e2a8a08b0765f1ffe066ba4d2ba.png)

![P\_2 \\times V\_2 =
k](ck12_math_images_dir/a885d58b19664655b4763ccedd7ca12a.png)

Therefore,

![P\_1 \\times V\_1=P\_2 \\times
V\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/60dfc5945c3229fdd608fc61be8e4337.png)

**Example 14.3**

A sample of oxygen gas has a volume of 150. mL when its pressure is
0.647 atm. What will the volume of the gas be at a pressure of 0.987 atm
if the temperature remains constant?

*Answer*

![& P\_1 \\times V\_1 =P\_2 \\times V\_2 \\\\\\& V\_1 =150. \\
\\text{mL, } V\_2=? \\\\\\& P\_1 =0.647 \\ \\text{atm, } P\_2=0.987 \\
\\text{atm} \\\\\\& V\_2 =\\frac{P\_1 \\times V\_1}{P\_2} \\\\\\& V\_2
=\\frac{(0.647\\ \\ \\text{atm})(150. \\ \\ \\text{mL})}{0.987\\ \\
\\text{atm}} \\\\\\& V\_2 =98.3\\ \\
\\text{mL}](ck12_math_images_dir/a4a3ad6f8a5d4dcbb62d2b44f314c1f2.png)

## Temperature {#14.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmU._1-ygd}

The thermometer was developed a short time after the barometer made it
possible to study pressure in a quantitative manner. Although crude
thermometers had been available for quite some time, Daniel Fahrenheit
constructed a more accurate thermometer in 1724 using mercury in glass.
Because the height of the mercury in the thermometer was a relative
measure, certain fixed points needed to be defined. Originally,
Fahrenheit defined a 1:1:1 mixture of ice, salt, and ammonium chloride
as 0°F, and the freezing/melting point of ice as 32°F. On this scale,
the normal temperature of the human body is 96°F, and the boiling point
of water is 212°C. The modern Fahrenheit scale is defined in terms of
the normal freezing and boiling points of water.

Anders Celsius (1736) devised a slightly different scale, which also had
two fixed values based on the freezing and boiling points of water.
Originally, he suggested a value of 0°C for the boiling point and 100°C
for the freezing point. Shortly after his death, the scale was reversed,
resulting in the form that is used today. The Celsius scale is the
standard way to measure temperature in most parts of the world.
**Figure**
[below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMDktRmFocmVuaGVpdC1DZWxjaXVz)
compares these two different scales.

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-kvb"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307669280.jpeg)

**Figure 14.6**

</div>

### Absolute Zero {#14.html#x-ck12-QWJzb2x1dGUgWmVybw.._1-hai}

The ideas of absolute zero and absolute temperature were conceived in
1848 by Lord Kelvin. Kelvin had observed that for every 1°C drop in
temperature, a sample of gas contracted by a uniform amount,
specifically, 1/273th of its volume at 0°C. If this data is
extrapolated, or projected, to the point where the gas would reach a
volume of zero, we reach a lower limit for possible temperatures. Kelvin
interpreted this to mean that -273°C is the lowest achievable
temperature. In contrast to other scales, where the temperature can be
below zero, the value of zero Kelvin represented an **absolute zero** .
**Figure** [below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMTAtQWJzb2x1dGUtWmVybw..)
shows Kelvin’s extrapolation. The Kelvin scale is used for all gas law
calculations.

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-ZjZhNzhkYWEyZTU4MDI1NjViZTNlZGY2MDk3ZmU3Mzc.-9df"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Wade Baxter" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307788776.png)

**Figure 14.7**

</div>

## Temperature Relationships {#14.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgUmVsYXRpb25zaGlwcw.._1-xyp}

### Charles's Law {#14.html#x-ck12-Q2hhcmxlcydzIExhdw.._1-ewg}

Various studies were done on the effects of temperature changes on both
pressure and volume by two prominent French scientists, Jacques Charles
(1746-1823) and Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778-1850). In 1802, Charles
and Gay-Lussac both proposed that for a fixed amount of gas at a
constant pressure, the volume is directly proportional to its absolute
temperature (V ∝ T). **Figure**
[below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMTEtQ2hhcmxlcy1MYXc.) illustrates
the volume-temperature relationship.

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-ZjZhNzhkYWEyZTU4MDI1NjViZTNlZGY2MDk3ZmU3Mzc.-svl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Wade Baxter" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235307990234.png)

**Figure 14.8**

</div>

This relationship between volume and pressure is commonly known as
**Charles's Law** . It can be expressed mathematically as follows:

![\\frac{V}{T}=k](ck12_math_images_dir/2bfafa294e26268eb5eb7e7c2dcc89d3.png)

where *k* is a constant that depends on the pressure and amount of the
gas sample. As in the case of Boyle's Law, this can also be used to
generate a way of comparing two different states for a given sample at
constant pressure:

![\\frac{V\_1}{T\_1}=\\frac{V\_2}{T\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/6009fabc2e313ab6215e77d26cbff1c3.png)

**Example 14.4**

A sample of neon gas occupies a volume of 752 mL at 25°C. What volume
will the gas occupy at 50°C if the pressure remains constant? Before you
begin, think about whether or not the volume should go up or down.

*Answer:*

Don't forget that all temperatures must be converted to absolute
temperature (Kelvin).

![T\_1 &=25\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=298\\ \\text{K} \\\\\\T\_2
&=50\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=323\\ \\text{K} \\\\\\V\_1 &=752\\ \\text{mL}
\\\\\\V\_2 &=? \\\\\\\\frac{V\_1}{T\_1} &=\\frac{V\_2}{T\_2} \\\\\\V\_2
&=\\frac{V\_1T\_2}{T\_1} \\\\\\V\_2 &=\\frac{(752\\ \\text{mL})(323\\
\\text{K})}{298\\ \\text{K}} \\\\\\V\_2 &=815\\
\\text{mL}](ck12_math_images_dir/33f94eb3ee98393b759db16c9f7f43ca.png)

### Gay-Lussac's Law {#14.html#x-ck12-R2F5LUx1c3NhYydzIExhdw.._1-kfc}

**Gay-Lussac's Law** describes the relationship between pressure and
absolute temperature:

![\\frac{P}{T}=k](ck12_math_images_dir/a4b6f62a2abc065be719f0a80ed8e4bd.png)

![\\frac{P\_1}{T\_1}=\\frac{P\_2}{T\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/c27ee98d29d8de42a548e99d91dbfc8c.png)

Gay-Lussac's law says that at a constant volume, the pressure of a gas
is directly proportional to its absolute temperature. This relationship
is also sometimes attributed to Guillaume Amontons (1663–1705). Although
his work predated that of Gay-Lussac by over a century, the data on
which he based his ideas were considerably less precise, due to the
cruder instrumentation available at the time.

**Example 14.5**

The gas in an aerosol can exerts a pressure of 3.00 atm at 25°C.
Directions on the can warn the user not to keep the can in a place where
the temperature exceeds 52°C. What would the gas pressure in the can be
at 52°C? Before you begin, do you think the pressure should go up, down
or stay the same?

*Answer:*

*Again, don't forget that all temperatures must be converted to absolute
temperature (Kelvin).*

![T\_1 &=25\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=298\\ \\text{K} \\\\\\T\_2
&=52\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=325\\ \\text{K} \\\\\\P\_1 &=3.00\\
\\text{atm} \\\\\\P\_2 &=? \\\\\\\\frac{P\_1}{T\_1} &=\\frac{P\_2}{T\_2}
\\\\\\P\_2 &=\\frac{P\_1T\_2}{T\_1} \\\\\\P\_2 &=\\frac{(3.00\\
\\text{atm})(325\\ \\text{K})}{298\\ \\text{K}} \\\\\\P\_2 &=3.27\\
\\text{atm}](ck12_math_images_dir/c3c0dd67c36bacc2e191b8c7cd73549b.png)

*Note that the pressure increases, which would be expected if the
temperature were to go up.*

### Combined Gas Law {#14.html#x-ck12-Q29tYmluZWQgR2FzIExhdw.._1-3yi}

We can combine the relationships described in Boyle’s law, Charles’s
law, and Gay-Lussac’s law to create a combined gas law that relates
pressure, volume, and temperature.

![\\frac{P\_1V\_1}{T\_1}=\\frac{P\_2V\_2}{T\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/733d2aca00d2b3cde92ae0516868d09a.png)

We can use this expression to predict changes to these variables for a
given chemical system.

**Example 14.6**

A helium-filled balloon has a volume of 50.0 L at 25°C and 1.08 atm.
What volume will it have at 0.855 atm and 10°C?

![P\_1 &=1.08\\ \\text{atm, } P\_2=0.855\\ \\text{atm} \\\\\\V\_1
&=50.0\\ \\text{L, } V\_2=? \\\\\\T\_1 &=25\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=298\\
\\text{K, } T\_2=10\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=283\\ \\text{K} \\\\\\V\_2
&=\\frac {P\_1T\_2V\_1}{P\_2T\_1} \\\\\\V\_2 &=\\frac{(1.08\\
\\text{atm})(283\\ \\text{K})(50.0\\ \\text{L})}{(0.855\\
\\text{atm})(298\\ \\text{K})}=60.0\\
\\text{L}](ck12_math_images_dir/da28e2f65a105f47b137584a45baa714.png)

## Avogadro's Law {#14.html#x-ck12-QXZvZ2Fkcm8ncyBMYXc._1-g9w}

In 1811, shortly after the work of Charles and Gay-Lussac, Amadeo
Avogadro (1776-1856) was also studying the relationships between
pressure, volume, and temperature. He postulated that if you compare two
samples of an ideal gas at the same temperature, pressure, and volume,
they contain the same number of molecules. This became known as
**Avogadro’s Law** . This means that at a given pressure and
temperature, the volume of a sample is directly proportional to the
number of molecules present.

![\\frac{V}{n}=k](ck12_math_images_dir/878e6d7336db7d3ccf8111775f4b9fb3.png)

Where:

<dl id="x-ck12-YmE3NTc3ODQyMmVlYWZjZjllZmY4N2E1MjlhZGY1MDg.-ksa">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YmE3NTc3ODQyMmVlYWZjZjllZmY4N2E1MjlhZGY1MDg.-dgl">
<dd>
V is the volume of the gas

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzlkZDY3ZDFmZWRiNDBjZGY0N2E0N2I4MWNiMDZjNjY.-qtt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWM0MzVmMDU2YmFmOTdjOTJjMDFhOWMyZGVjMmNjYjE.-otk">
<dd>
n is the amount of gas particles (generally measured in moles)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzA4YzhjNjI3ZTkwNWZkOTg2YzcwYjI1YzdkNWVhZTE.-qhm">
<dd>
k is a proportionality constant

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
## Ideal Gas Law {#14.html#x-ck12-SWRlYWwgR2FzIExhdw.._1-1p7}

If we add Avogadro's Law into the combined gas law, we get the following
equation:

![\\frac{P V}{T
n}=constant](ck12_math_images_dir/f8abf870b9dfd5f45f3dfe5d33497696.png)

Unlike the constants for the other gas laws, this constant is given a
special name. The ideal gas constant (R) has the same value for any
sample of any ideal gas. A more common way to write the **ideal gas
law** is the following:

![PV=nRT](ck12_math_images_dir/fb2df3ecf87eaa43f2bdf8fd25a59ab0.png)

Recall that 1 mol of an ideal gas at 1 atm of pressure and 0°C (standard
temperature and pressure) occupies a volume of 22.4 L. We can use this
information to calculate the value of R:

![R=\\frac{P \\times V}{T \\times n}=\\frac{(1 \\ \\text{atm})(22.4 \\
\\text{L})}{(273 \\ \\text{K})(1 \\ \\text{mol})}=0.0821\\
\\text{L}\\cdot\\text{atm}\\text{K}\^{-1}\\cdot\\text{mol}\^{-1}](ck12_math_images_dir/605c125ec921240cb7b6ebbcdca0f6c5.png)

Using more precise measurements, the ideal gas constant is found to have
a value of 0.08206 L•atm•K ^-1^ •mol ^-1^ .

**Example 14.7**

Sulfur hexafluoride (SF ~6~ ) is a colorless, odorless, and very
unreactive gas. Calculate the pressure (in atm) exerted by 1.82 moles of
the gas at 69.5°C when confined to a rigid steel vessel with a volume of
5.43 L.

*Answer:*

![T\_1 &=69.5\^\\circ \\text{C}+273=342.5\\ \\text{K} \\\\\\P
&=\\frac{nRT}{V} \\\\\\P &=\\frac{(1.82 \\ \\text{mol})(0.08206 \\
\\text{L}\\cdot\\text{atm}\\cdot\\text{K}\^{-1}\\cdot\\text{mol}\^{-1})(342.5
\\ \\text{K})}{5.43 \\ \\text{L}} \\\\\\P &=9.42 \\
\\text{atm}](ck12_math_images_dir/c309b294e91edb4b7956ce9c4c21b918.png)

Note that, in order for all of the units to cancel correctly, the
pressure must be expressed in atmospheres, the volume must be in liters,
the amount must be in moles, and the temperature must be in Kelvin. If
different units were used, the ideal gas constant would have a different
value.

## Lesson Summary {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-kaq}

-   Pressure and volume are inversely proportional at a
    constant temperature.
-   Volume and temperature are directly proportional at a
    constant pressure.
-   Pressure and temperature are directly proportional at a
    constant volume.
-   Pressure, volume, and temperature are related by the combined
    gas law.
-   The volume occupied by a gas at a given temperature and pressure is
    proportional to the number of gas molecules present.
-   For any ideal gas, PV=nRT, where R is a constant with a value of
    0.08206 L•atm•K ^-1^ •mol ^-1^ .

## Lesson Review Questions {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-na5}

1.  A sample of a gas has a volume of 4.22 L at 27.8°C and 734 mmHg.
    What will its volume be at 24.6°C and 755 mmHg?
2.  How many molecules of nitrogen gas are in a 5.20 L vessel at 136°C
    and 0.43 atm?
3.  A 34.8 L tank of Ar gas is connected to an evacuated 87.5 L tank. If
    the final pressure is 640 mmHg, what must have been the original gas
    pressure in the 34.8 L tank?
4.  A 54.0 L cylinder contains 798 g of chlorine gas at 29°C. What mass
    of chlorine must be released to reduce the pressure to 0.78 atm?
5.  A sample of gas at 1 atm has a temperature of 15°C and a volume of
    2.58 L. The temperature is then raised to 38°C at 1 atm.
    1.  Does the volume of the gas increase or decrease?
    2.  Calculate the new volume.

6.  An automobile engine contains a vaporized sample of gasoline. The
    initial volume in the cylinder is 0.725 L. After compression, the
    volume is reduced to 0.075 L. The fuel mixture initially exerts a
    pressure of 1.00 atm. Calculate the pressure of the compressed
    fuel-air mixture (assuming temperature and the amount of gas
    remain constant).
7.  If a gas is cooled from 333.0 K to 273.0 K at a constant volume,
    what would the final pressure be if the original pressure was 780.0
    mm Hg?
8.  A bag of potato chips is packaged at sea level (1.00 atm) and has a
    volume of 315 mL. If this bag of chips is transported to Denver
    (0.820 atm), what will the new volume of the bag be? Assume the
    temperature remains the same.
9.  Calculate the volume (in L) occupied by 2.12 moles of nitric
    oxide (NO) at 6.54 atm and 76°C.

## Further Reading/Supplemental Links {#14.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhbCBMaW5rcw.._1-qdh}

1.  Charles’s Law Practice Simulator:
    [http://science.widener.edu/svb/tutorial/charleslaw.html](charleslaw.html)
2.  Nobel Prize 2001 for studies in absolute zero:
    [http://www.colorado.edu/NewsServices/nobel/background.html](background.html)
3.  The gas laws:
    [http://misterguch.brinkster.net/gaslaws.html](gaslaws.html)

## Points to Consider {#14.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-ifh}

-   As we studied gases in this lesson, we assumed that all gases
    exhibit ideal behavior (collisions between particles are completely
    elastic, the particles do not attract or repel one another, and the
    volume of the gas particles is negligible compared to the volume
    they occupy). If some of these assumptions were not quite true, how
    would it affect the observed gas laws?
-   What properties of gases are affected by the speeds of the
    individual particles?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686132] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686133] -->

# Gas Mixtures {#14.html#x-ck12-R2FzIE1peHR1cmVz}

## Lesson Objectives {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-dqb}

-   Define partial pressure.
-   Describe Dalton’s law of partial pressures and perform calculations
    using this equation.
-   Define and perform calculations using mole fractions.
-   Define diffusion and effusion and how they relate to other
    properties of gases.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-upk}

-   **partial pressure** : The pressure that each individual gas exerts
    in a gaseous mixture.
-   **Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures** : States that if two or more
    gases are mixed in a container, each one will exert the same amount
    of pressure that it would if it were by itself in a container of the
    same size.
-   **mole fraction** : Expresses what fraction or percentage a
    particular substance contributes to the total number of gas
    particles present.
-   **diffusion** : When the random motions of gas particles in a large
    container results in an even distribution throughout all the
    available space.
-   **effusion** : The process of a confined gas escaping through a tiny
    hole in its container.
-   **Graham’s law of effusion** : States that the rate of effusion or
    diffusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of
    the molar mass of the gas.

## Check Your Understanding {#14.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-akk}

1.  Which of the following statements are true about gases?
    1.  Gases always form a solid coating on the interior of the
        container which they are bounded by.
    2.  Gas particles move fairly quickly, often at speeds of more than
        100 miles per hour.
    3.  In environments with multiple gases, there will be two layers
        formed – the heaviest gases on the bottom, lightest on top.
    4.  Gases mix homogeneously, regardless of which gases are combined.

## Introduction {#14.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-70c}

In our previous lesson, we studied the relationships that exist between
pressure, temperature, volume, and amount for gases. One assumption we
made was that the gases behave ideally, which means that the collisions
between gas particles are completely elastic, the particles do not
attract or repel one another, and the particle volumes are negligible
compared to the overall volume that they occupy. Many properties of
ideal gases do not depend on the identity of the gas. For example, we
know that one mole of any ideal gas takes up 22.4 L at STP, regardless
of the chemical makeup of the individual particles. However, not all
properties are like this. For example, the particles of different gases
have different average speeds, even if the samples are kept at the same
temperature. In this lesson, we will examine how molecular speed is
determined for a given sample and use this information to investigate
what happens to gas behavior when molecular speeds vary.

## Gas Mixtures {#14.html#x-ck12-R2FzIE1peHR1cmVz_2-bcs}

Gases are frequently encountered as mixtures. For example, the air we
breathe is a mixture of several gases. It is mostly nitrogen and oxygen,
but water vapor, argon, carbon dioxide, and various other gases are also
present in small amounts. Suppose we place a sample of air in a rigid
container. If we were to visualize what is happening at the molecular
level, we would see various gas particles mixed together in a
homogeneous fashion. Each gas is evenly distributed throughout the
entire container, just as they would be if there were no other
substances present. The following simulation will help us visualize this
setup:
[http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/gas-properties](gas-properties)
.

Based on your observations of the above simulation, would you say the
mixture of heavy and light gases was homogeneous or heterogeneous? Were
the collisions elastic? What are the similarities and differences
between the heavy gas particles and light gas particles?

### Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures {#14.html#x-ck12-RGFsdG9uJ3MgTGF3IG9mIFBhcnRpYWwgUHJlc3N1cmVz_2-gzh}

In our hypothetical gas mixture, we could measure the total pressure
exerted by the mixture using a barometer or other instruments. However,
we cannot directly measure the pressure exerted by each individual
component. How can we determine this information? The concept of
**partial pressures** was first described in 1801 by John Dalton
(1777-1844). **Dalton's law of partial pressures** states that if two or
more gases are mixed in a container, each one will exert the same amount
of pressure as it would if it were by itself in a container of the same
size. As a result, the total pressure of the mixture will be the sum of
the partial pressures. For example, here is an image that shows what
happens at the molecular level when two different gases are mixed.

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-pbx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235308096206.png)

**Figure 14.9**

</div>

The partial pressure is the pressure that each individual gas exerts. If
we assume that a certain sample of air contains only nitrogen, oxygen,
and argon, we could express the total pressure of the mixture as a sum
of three partial pressures:

![P\_t=P\_{O\_2}+P\_{N\_2}+P\_{Ar}](ck12_math_images_dir/97c471006188440530fbaff1c4d8a1ad.png)

P ~t~ =total pressure

P ~O~ 2=partial pressure of O ~2~

P ~N~ 2=partial pressure of N ~2~

P ~Ar~ =partial pressure of Ar

The percentage of the total pressure that is due to one gas in a mixture
is proportional to its mole fraction. A **mole fraction** expresses what
fraction or percentage the moles of a particular substance contribute to
the total number of moles present. It can be calculated as follows:

![X\_A=\\frac{\\text{moles} \\ A}{\\text{total
moles}}](ck12_math_images_dir/5d8c3580d8b0705e2f28ce28c8c588e3.png)

**Example 14.8**

If you had a gas mixture that contained 3.0 moles of argon gas and 6.0
moles of oxygen gas, what is the mole fraction of the argon? If the
total pressure is 760 mm Hg, what is the partial pressure of argon?

*Answer:*

First, calculate the mole fraction of argon:

![X\_{Ar} &=\\frac{\\text{moles Ar}}{\\text{total moles}} \\\\\\X\_{Ar}
&=\\frac{3.0\\ \\text{moles Ar}}{9.0\\ \\text{total
moles}}=0.33](ck12_math_images_dir/72fd0fd2ce9c59baf1616b8cc9de0a75.png)

*Partial Pressure:*

![P\_{\\text{Ar}} &=(X\_{\\text{Ar}})(P\_t) \\\\\\P\_{\\text{Ar}}
&=(0.33)(760 \\ \\text{mm Hg})=253 \\ \\text{mm
Hg}](ck12_math_images_dir/daedf94908bed8323bfda885deef5ded.png)

## Partial Pressures and the Ideal Gas Law {#14.html#x-ck12-UGFydGlhbCBQcmVzc3VyZXMgYW5kIHRoZSBJZGVhbCBHYXMgTGF3_2-ibu}

We could also determine partial pressure by solving for P in PV = nRT,
by using a value for n that only accounts for one of the gases present.

**Example 14.9**

A gaseous mixture consists of 380 g of F ~2~ and 100 g of Ne. If the
volume of the container is 112 L and the temperature is 273 K,
calculate:

1.  The moles of each gas.
2.  Total moles of all gases.
3.  Mole fraction of each gas.
4.  Total pressure of mixture.
5.  Partial pressure of each gas.

**Answer:**

1.  *Moles of each gas* : ![n\_{\\text{F}\_2}&=380\\ \\text{g F}\_2
    \\times \\frac{1\\ \\text{mol F}\_2}{38\\ \\text{g F}\_2}=10.\\
    \\text{mol F}\_2 \\\\\\n\_{\\text{Ne}}&=100\\ \\text{g Ne} \\times
    \\frac{1\\ \\text{mol Ne}}{20\\ \\text{g Ne}}=5\\ \\text{mol
    Ne}](ck12_math_images_dir/d513463ca0225111f62f37b37d40ebe6.png)
2.  *Total moles of all gases* :
    ![n\_t&=n\_{\\text{F}\_2}+n\_{\\text{Ne}}
    \\\\\\n\_t&=10+5=15](ck12_math_images_dir/914113cdfdaa35ff89665faa812697d6.png)
3.  *Mole fraction of each gas* : ![X\_{\\text{F}\_2}&=\\frac{10\\
    \\text{mol}}{15\\ \\text{mol}}=0.67
    \\\\\\X\_{\\text{Ne}}&=\\frac{5\\ \\text{mol}}{15\\
    \\text{mol}}=0.33](ck12_math_images_dir/7ba6973cb5a3731b56c50b940d18231f.png)
4.  *Total pressure of the mixture* : ![P\_t
    &=\\frac{nRT}{V}=\\frac{(15\\ \\text{mol})(0.08206\\
    \\text{L}\\cdot\\text{atm}\\cdot\\text{K}\^{-1}\\cdot\\text{mol}\^{-1})(273\\
    \\text{K})}{(112\\ \\text{L})} \\\\\\P\_t &=3.0\\
    \\text{atm}](ck12_math_images_dir/44f1ca53f7912e499527cb92247e3f47.png)
5.  *Partial pressure of each gas* :
    ![P\_{\\text{F}\_2}&=X\_{\\text{F}\_2}P\_t=(0.67)(3.0\\
    \\text{atm})=2.0\\ \\text{atm}
    \\\\\\P\_{\\text{Ne}}&=X\_{\\text{Ne}}P\_t=(0.33)(3.0\\
    \\text{atm})=0.99\\
    \\text{atm}](ck12_math_images_dir/a3de41efa8064f051a8d657ba12e5954.png)

## Diffusion and Effusion {#14.html#x-ck12-RGlmZnVzaW9uIGFuZCBFZmZ1c2lvbg.._2-ruu}

Gas molecules are always in motion. We can measure the movement of gases
in various ways. We have already seen that the temperature is related to
the average speed of the gas particles. Because individual particles are
all moving in random directions, the sample as a whole does not move
this fast from place to place. However, we can also look at the speed at
which an entire gas sample moves. What if a gas is transferred to a
larger container? Eventually, the random motions of the gas particles
will result in an even distribution throughout all the available space.
This process is referred to as **diffusion** .

Another related process is effusion. **Effusion** is the process of a
confined gas escaping through a tiny hole in its container. Effusion can
be observed by the fact that a helium-filled balloon will stop floating
and sink to the floor after a day or so. This is because the helium gas
effuses through tiny pores in the balloon. Both diffusion and effusion
are related to the speed at which various gas molecules move. Gases that
have a lower molar mass effuse and diffuse at a faster rate than gases
that have a higher molar mass. While they are similar processes, there
is a key difference between diffusion and effusion. Diffusion describes
the process of a gas spreading out at a constant pressure, such as
throughout a room. Effusion, on the other hand, describes the process of
a gas spreading out from a high pressure surroundings to lower pressure
surroundings.

Scottish chemist Thomas Graham (1805-1869) studied the rates of effusion
and diffusion for various gases. **Graham’s Law of Effusion** states
that the rate of effusion or diffusion of a gas is inversely
proportional to the square root of the molar mass of the gas.

![Rate\_{effusion}\\propto
\\frac{1}{\\sqrt{MM}}](ck12_math_images_dir/824bff5522028f7003d505170b081cf6.png)

Relative rates of effusion for gases of different molecular masses can
be studied by looking at the time needed for a given gas to effuse
through a pinhole in a vacuum ( **Figure**
[below](#14.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTQtMTMtRWZmdXNpb24.) ). The lighter the
gas molecules are, the smaller the number in the denominator, and the
faster the gas effuses and diffuses.

<div
id="14.html#x-ck12-YTBiNmM3MTVlNTM1M2YwNTEwYWE3YzFkMjM1NmRlNmM.-njk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_14_files/20151009235308228361.png)

**Figure 14.10**

Molecular Mass vs. Time.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-a64}

-   Dalton’s law of partial pressures states that the total pressure of
    a gas mixture is the sum of the partial pressures of each
    gas component.
-   Mole fractions describe the fraction or percentage of a mixture that
    is made up of a particular substance.
-   The rates of diffusion and effusion for a gas are inversely
    proportional to the square root of its molar mass.

## Lesson Review Questions {#14.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-0rp}

1.  Say you have a closed container containing 10 moles of a mixture
    of gases. If you removed 2 moles of one of the gases and replaced it
    with 2 moles of a lighter gas, would the total pressure in the
    container increase, decrease, or remain the same?
2.  A gaseous mixture consists of 5.2 moles of helium and 2.1 moles
    of nitrogen. If the volume of the container is 11.2 L and the
    temperature is 273 K, calculate the following:
    1.  The total moles of gas particles
    2.  The mole fraction of each gas
    3.  The total pressure of the mixture
    4.  The partial pressure of each gas

3.  A gaseous mixture consists of 11.0 g of CO ~2~ and 48.0 g of O ~2~ .
    If the volume of the container is 2.24 L and the temperature is 273
    K, calculate the following:
    1.  The moles of each gas
    2.  The total moles of gas particles
    3.  The mole fraction of each gas
    4.  The total pressure of the mixture
    5.  The partial pressure of each gas

4.  A gaseous mixture consists of 80 g of chlorine and 21 g of nitrogen.
    If the volume of the container is 11.2 L and the temperature is 273
    K, calculate:
    1.  The moles of each gas.
    2.  The total moles of gas.
    3.  The mole fraction of each gas.
    4.  The total pressure of the mixture.
    5.  The partial pressure of each gas.

5.  Compare and contrast diffusion and effusion. Does the aroma of a
    sprayed perfume represent diffusion or effusion?
6.  A sharp object punctures a bike tire. Explain which process is
    responsible for the loss of air from the tire that causes a flat.
7.  The mole fraction of CO in the air in a garage where a charcoal
    grill is operating can be dangerously high, about 5 × 10 ^-5^ . If
    the barometric pressure is 745 mm Hg, what is the partial pressure
    of CO in atmospheres?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#14.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-jec}

-   Dutton, F. B. (1961). Dalton's law of partial pressures. Journal of
    Chemical Education, 38(8), A545. doi: 10.1021/ed038pA545.1
-   Kenney, T. (1990). Graham's law: Defining gas velocities. Journal of
    Chemical Education, 67(10), 871. doi: 10.1021/ed067p871
-   Practice with partial pressures:
    [http://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/ideal-gas-laws/v/partial-pressure](partial-pressure)
-   Gas Encyclopedia-Learn about the properties of various gases:
    [http://encyclopedia.airliquide.com/Encyclopedia.asp?GasID=59](Encyclopedia.asp?GasID=59)

## Points to Consider {#14.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-gpx}

-   In this chapter, we investigated the properties of gases and
    gas mixtures. How do you think the properties of liquid mixtures
    might be similar or different from those of gas mixtures?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686133] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#14.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-av6}

1.  User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nitrogen-glow.jpg](File:Nitrogen-glow.jpg) .
    CC BY 3.0
2.  User:Danomagnum/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MercuryBarometer.svg](File:MercuryBarometer.svg) .
    Public Domain
3.  Jodi So, using world map clip art by Jenny Boyd. [CK-12 Foundation
    (clip art available
    at http://www.clker.com/clipart-world-map-32.html)](clipart-world-map-32.html)) .
    CC BY-NC 3.0 (clip art in public domain)
4.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
5.  Rhett Maxwell.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/rhettmaxwell/2443185091/]() . CC BY
    2.0
6.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
7.  Wade Baxter. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
8.  Wade Baxter. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
9.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
10. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="15.html"></span>

# Water {#15.html#x-ck12-V2F0ZXI.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_15_files/20151009235310700925.jpeg)
</span>

Water is a major contributor to shaping the earth’s surface. Whether
through dissolving of materials and the wearing away of solids (as seen
in the image above) or moving materials to build up deposits
(stalagmites and stalactites in caves), water exerts a significant
influence on our environment.

^Wolfgang\\ Staudt.\\ www.flickr.com/photos/wolfgangstaudt/2252688630/.\\ CC\\ BY\\ 2.0.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686135] -->

# Properties of Water {#15.html#x-ck12-UHJvcGVydGllcyBvZiBXYXRlcg..}

## Lesson Objectives {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-xet}

-   Explain the different characteristics that water exhibits in its
    solid, liquid, and gaseous forms.
-   Explain the processes by which water, ice, and steam interconvert.
-   Describe the arrangement of water molecules in ice.
-   Describe the molecular model of liquid water, and use this to
    explain some of its properties.
-   Compare the density, surface tension, and heat capacity of water to
    other common liquids.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-uyb}

-   **crystalline solid** : A solid in which molecules are fixed in an
    arranged pattern.
-   **frost** : A type of ice produced by the deposition of water vapor.
-   **amorphous solid** : A solid in which molecules are in a fixed
    place but lack the organization of a regular, repeating pattern.
-   **surface tension** : A property of liquids describing the tendency
    of surface molecules to be pulled in towards the liquids center,
    creating a surface that is tightened like a film.
-   **heat capacity** : An inherent property of a given substance
    indicating how much heat the substance must absorb to cause a
    certain increase in temperature.

## Check Your Understanding {#15.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-nbk}

1.  Explain the similarities and differences between polar and
    nonpolar substances. What intermolecular forces do each of these
    substance types exhibit?
2.  Some substances, like solid carbon dioxide, sublime at
    room temperature. Write an equation describing this process. What is
    the opposite of sublimation called?
3.  An ice cube is cold to the touch because heat from our hands is
    going into the ice cube, heating and eventually melting the ice. How
    would it feel if we were to touch something while it was in the
    process of freezing?
4.  The following substances are placed into a graduated cylinder, in no
    particular order: mercury, copper BBs, and water. Over time, the
    substances separate based on density. How will these substances
    layer themselves in the cylinder, from top to bottom?
5.  Are the following substances amorphous or crystalline?
    1.  hard candy
    2.  diamond
    3.  glass in a windowpane

## Introduction {#15.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-13w}

Water is truly an amazing substance. It can exist in all three states
under normal pressures and temperatures. At room temperature, it is a
tasteless, odorless, colorless liquid, although it exhibits a blue hue
when present in large volumes. Approximately 70% of the Earth’s surface
is covered in water. For a small molecule, water molecules are highly
attracted to one another, due to particularly strong hydrogen bonds.
This leads to a number of properties, such as a relatively high surface
tension. Unlike most other substances, water expands when it freezes.
Water is also able to absorb relatively large amounts of heat with only
minimal changes in temperature. This can be seen on a small scale, such
as the coolant in your car, or on a larger scale, such as the more
moderate climates in coastal areas. The water in the oceans acts as a
tremendous heat sink, which influences global weather patterns. The
clouds that form above lakes and oceans originate from the evaporation
of lake and ocean water. They are byproducts of water’s thermal
regulating capacity. Additionally, water is not only found here on
Earth; scientists have found evidence of water on a number of
extraterrestrial planets. In this lesson, we are going to take a look at
this unique and important substance.

## Water, Ice and Steam {#15.html#x-ck12-V2F0ZXIsIEljZSBhbmQgU3RlYW0.-wgh}

As we saw in the *States of Matter* chapter, all substances can
transform from one state to another, depending on the temperature and
pressure of the environment. The solid, liquid, and gaseous forms of
water all play an important part in our everyday lives.

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-xjd"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235310828797.png)

**Figure 15.1**

</div>

**Example 15.1**

Which of the processes in **Figure**
[above](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDItUGhhc2UtQ2hhbmdlcw..) require
the absorption of heat? Which release heat?

*Answer:*

Melting, sublimation, and evaporation absorb heat from their
surroundings. Freezing, deposition, and condensation release heat.

## Ice - H ~2~ O(s) {#15.html#x-ck12-SWNlIC0gSA..-guz}

Water in its solid form is generally referred to as ice. Other common
terms for solid water include snow, sleet, hail, or frost. The use of a
different term generally depends on how and where the water was frozen.
Ice plays a major role in activities as diverse as skiing and skating,
rain making, polar marine transportation, and offshore drilling. It also
plays an important role in the degradation of concrete and other porous
materials. Liquid water gets into the cracks of such materials, which
can then fracture if the water freezes and expands. Icing on airplanes
and electrical transmission lines can also interfere with their
functioning.

Water can freeze into both crystalline and non-crystalline (amorphous)
forms. **Crystalline solids** refer to solids in which the atoms or
molecules are packed in a precisely arranged order. The environmental
conditions under which the transition occurs dictate whether this phase
change produces regular crystals or not. In its crystalline form, water
molecules are generally arranged in a hexagonal array, as shown in
**Figure** [below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDQtSWNlLVN0cnVjdHVyZQ..)
.

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-bik"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235310944092.jpeg)

**Figure 15.2**

</div>

Ice on Earth generally forms when liquid water freezes. However, it can
also be produced by the deposition of water vapor (i.e., H ~2~ O(g) → H
~2~ O(s)). When this is the case, the ice is often referred to as
**frost** ( **Figure** [below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDUtRnJvc3Q.)
).

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-YjE5YmY3NDY4ODBlYjcyMTA0NjVmNmEzNTljZjNhYzk.-ata"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="George" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/29171973@N00/336013964/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235311074872.jpeg)

**Figure 15.3**

</div>

When water freezes in a non-crystalline, amorphous form as frost, the
water molecules are fixed in place, but not in a regular, repeating
pattern. Frost and other **amorphous solids** are characterized by their
unorganized and unpredictable structure. Because ice comes in both
amorphous and crystalline forms, there are differences in the physical
properties of ice such as its hardness and density.

**Example 15.2**

Can you think of another substance that has an amorphous geometry? Can
you think of another substance that has a crystalline geometry?

*Answer:*

Some types of candy, such as gummi bears or taffy, are amorphous solids.
Table salt has a crystalline geometry.

## Liquid Water – H ~2~ O(l) {#15.html#x-ck12-TGlxdWlkIFdhdGVyIOKAkyBI-lbu}

Liquid water is formed when water vapor condenses (i.e., H ~2~ O(g) → H
~2~ O(l) or when ice melts (i.e., H ~2~ O(s) → H ~2~ O(l)). Because
water is a molecular substance, it is a poor conductor of electricity in
its pure form. However, as we will see later, its conductivity can be
improved by the addition of certain substances. Water molecules are
polar, and this overall polarity gives rise to many of the properties of
water. For example, an interesting effect is seen when water is placed
in a static electric field, as shown in the **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDYtU3RhdGljLUVsZWN0cmljaXR5) and
the video below. This phenomenon can be explained in terms of the
polarity of water molecules.

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-YjBiYmY0YTYwODcwZmJmYWVjNjY4ODg2M2MwNDFhOWI.-f9l"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235311185796.png)

**Figure 15.4**

Water bending in a field of static electricity

</div>

[![](ck12_15_files/tmpRpk3Ip.jpeg)](-U52e6cn8Z4%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3Da454d033499886f52dcb75ef163c7b20)

Click on the image above for more content

### Density {#15.html#x-ck12-RGVuc2l0eQ..-t53}

The molecular structures of solid and liquid water are shown in
**Figure** [below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDctV2F0ZXItU3RydWN0dXJl)
.

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-Mjc2MmQ4NGQzNTJlNjViMTQ3Yzg1OTQxMzVlYmM5YTI.-soh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235311287950.png)

**Figure 15.5**

Molecular arrangement of H ~2~ O molecules in the solid ( *right* ) and
liquid ( *left* ) phases.

</div>

Interestingly, due to the "open" nature of the rigid solid form, the
density of liquid water is actually higher than that of solid ice. As a
result, ice floats on water. This is relatively rare; most other
substances are more dense in their solid form. The density of water as a
function of temperature can be graphed, as shown in **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDgtV2F0ZXItRGVuc2l0eQ..) .

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-MmY0YjQxZDM5NWFmZTlmYmY3NjY0MmEwYTQ3ZWEwNGE.-h3v"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235311422698.png)

**Figure 15.6**

Density vs. temperature curve for water.

</div>

### Surface Tension {#15.html#x-ck12-U3VyZmFjZSBUZW5zaW9u-idf}

As we saw in our chapter on *Covalent Bonding* , water molecules attract
each other through dipole-dipole interactions and hydrogen bonds. An
example of a favorable arrangement is shown in **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDktRGlwb2xl) .

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-YTQ4ZjE5NTkwMTExMTExMWQ5ZDM2OWMxNTJjMmZmYWI.-pwk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogen-bonding-in-water-2D.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235311540401.png)

**Figure 15.7**

Hydrogen bonding between water molecules.

</div>

Molecules within a liquid are pulled equally in all directions by
intermolecular forces. However, molecules at the surface are pulled
downwards and sideways by other liquid molecules, but not upwards away
from the surface. The overall effect is that the surface molecules are
pulled into the liquid, creating a surface that is tightened like a
film. This phenomenon is referred to as **surface tension** . Liquids
that have strong intermolecular forces, like the hydrogen bonding in
water, exhibit the greatest surface tension. **Table**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtMTUuMQ..) shows surface tension
values for various common liquids.

  Fluid                  Surface Tension (N/m)
  ---------------------- -----------------------
  benzene                0.0289
  diethyl ether          0.0728
  carbon tetrachloride   0.027
  chloroform             0.0271
  ethanol                0.0221
  ethylene glycol        0.0477
  glycerol               0.064
  mercury                0.425
  methanol               0.0227
  propanol               0.0237
  toluene                0.0284
  water at 20°C          0.072

  :  Surface Tension of Common Fluids

The surface tension of water is illustrated by a number of common
occurrences. For example, water spiders are able to walk across bodies
of water because of surface tension. Even though the spiders are denser
than water, they do not sink, because the small amount of weight
pressing down on the surface is not enough to break the strong hydrogen
bonds that hold the surface together.

### Heat Capacity {#15.html#x-ck12-SGVhdCBDYXBhY2l0eQ..-fni}

The **heat capacity** of a substance measures how much heat it needs to
absorb to cause a certain increase in temperature. Substances with high
heat capacities can absorb large amounts of heat with only a minimal
temperature increase. Compared to other common liquids, water has a
relatively high heat capacity. The heat capacities of some common
substances are listed in **Table**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtMTUuMg..) .

  Material        Heat capacity (calories•g ^-1^ •°C ^-1^ )
  --------------- -------------------------------------------
  Acetone         0.51
  Aluminum        0.22
  Ammonia         1.13
  Copper          0.09
  Grain alcohol   0.23
  Lead            0.03
  Mercury         0.03
  Silicon         0.18
  Silver          0.06
  Water           1.00

  :  Heat Capacity of Common Materials

**Example 15.3**

How much heat must be absorbed by 1 gram of water to raise its
temperature by 5°C?

*Answer:*

Water has a heat capacity of 1.00 calories•g ^-1^ •°C ^-1^ . Raising the
temperature of 1 gram of water by 5°C would require the absorption of 5
calories of energy.

## Steam – H ~2~ O(g) {#15.html#x-ck12-U3RlYW0g4oCTIEg.-bjr}

Water vapor, or steam, can be produced either through the vaporization
of liquid water (i.e., H ~2~ O(l) → H ~2~ O(g) or the sublimation of
solid water (i.e., H ~2~ O(s) → H ~2~ O(g)). When water changes from a
liquid to a gas at normal temperatures and pressures, we refer to the
process as evaporation. When we sweat, we take advantage of this
process. Vaporization requires an input of energy, so when our sweat
evaporates, it absorbs some of the energy from our bodies, thus cooling
us. When water is vaporized by heating it to its boiling point, we
generally refer to it as boiling instead.

Steam is a very useful form of water that can be used to do mechanical
work, like powering steam engines and turbines. Such devices are
important for the generation of electricity.

## Lesson Summary {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-cgb}

-   Water can exist in all three states under normal pressures
    and temperatures. It is tasteless, odorless, and exists as a liquid
    at room temperature and standard atmospheric pressure.
-   In its solid form, water is frequently referred to as ice. The terms
    snow, sleet, hail, or frost may also be used, depending on the
    conditions under which the water solidified. Ice can exist as an
    amorphous solid or as a crystalline solid.
-   In its pure liquid form, water is a poor conductor of electricity.
    Unlike most substances, water is more dense in its liquid state than
    its solid state. As a result, water expands when it freezes, and ice
    floats on water.
-   Compared to other liquids, water has a relatively high surface
    tension and heat capacity. Both of these properties are partially a
    result of the strong hydrogen bonds that hold water
    molecules together.

## Lesson Review Questions {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-vvu}

1.  Why do you suppose a wet cloth that is hung outdoors in freezing
    weather can be retrieved later in a dry state?
2.  Identify the state(s) of water present at each of the points
    identified in the **Figure**
    [below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtUjEtMg..) .

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-YTFjOWE1ZGUzMWZkZTFmMzI0YTRkZDFhNjEwMTgwM2Q.-mhs"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235311938603.png)

**Figure 15.8**

</div>

3.  When might you see condensation, evaporation, melting, or freezing
    as part of a normal weather pattern? What evidence do you have that
    these changes have occurred?
4.  Which of the processes illustrated in **Figure**
    [above](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMDItUGhhc2UtQ2hhbmdlcw..) do you
    suppose are responsible for the formation of hail during a
    thunderstorm?
5.  Give an example other than those mentioned in the chapter of the
    strong surface tension exhibited by water.
6.  How is it possible for water to fracture rock when it freezes?
7.  Based on the data in the table of "Heat Capacity," do substances
    that exhibit hydrogen bonding appear to have larger or smaller heat
    capacities than other substances?
8.  What do you suppose would happen if you placed an ice cube in a
    beaker containing pure ethanol (density = 0.789 g/mL)? Would it sink
    or float?
9.  What do you suppose would happen if a solid piece of ethanol were
    placed into liquid ethanol? What about if it were placed in liquid
    water?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#15.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-xvn}

-   Libbrecht, K. (2006). Ken Libbrecht's Field Guide to Snowflakes. St.
    Paul, MN: Voyager Press.
-   Schulson, E. M. (1999). The Structure and Mechanical Behavior
    of Ice. JOM, 51(2), 21-27.
-   Suter, R., Rosenberg, O., Loeb, S., Wildman, H., & Long, J. (1997).
    Locomotion on the Water Surface: Propulsive Mechanisms of the Fisher
    Spider Dolomedes Triton. The Journal of Experimental Biology,
    200, 2523-2538.
-   Measuring surface tension:
    [http://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-projects/project\_ideas/Phys\_p012.shtml](Phys_p012.shtml)
-   SnowCrystals.com:
    [http://www.its.caltech.edu/\~atomic/snowcrystals/]()

## Points to Consider {#15.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-e3p}

-   How might water’s intermolecular forces affect its ability to
    interact with other substances? What types of substances mix well
    with water? What types of substances do not?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686135] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686136] -->

# Aqueous Solutions {#15.html#x-ck12-QXF1ZW91cyBTb2x1dGlvbnM.}

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-ZTc3ZWY4Mjg2MzgzMmNhMTQ5YWQxOGQwNDg5NmY2MjY.-gmo"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coloured-transition-metal-solutions.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312051088.jpeg)

**Figure 15.9**

Aqueous Solutions of Transition Metal Compounds

</div>

## Lesson Objectives {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-akq}

-   Explain how water acts as a solvent.
-   Describe the process of dissolution and what this looks like at the
    molecular and macroscopic level.
-   Describe the process of dissociation and what this looks like at the
    molecular and macroscopic level.
-   Define and give examples of solvents and solutes.
-   Describe and give examples of chemical solutions.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-krh}

-   **aqueous solution** : A homogeneous mixture in which the most
    abundant component is water.
-   **solution** : A homogeneous mixture.
-   **solvent** : The substance in a solution that is present in the
    largest amount.
-   **solute** : All other substances in a mixture or solution.
-   **dissolution** : The process where crystals in a molecule get
    smaller and smaller until the solution is transparent.
-   **soluble** : A homogeneous mixture where a solute dissolves
    completely into a solvent.
-   **dissociation** : The process of separating ions from one another.
-   **insoluble** : A heterogeneous mixture where a solute does not
    dissolve completely into a solvent.

## Check Your Understanding {#15.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-hag}

-   Give two examples each of ionic compounds and molecular compounds,
    and explain their similarities and differences.
-   Identify one solid and one liquid that mix well with water.
-   Give an example of a gas that mixes with water.

## Introduction {#15.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-k4a}

In our last section, we took a detailed look at water and its physical
properties and characteristics. We examined properties like surface
tension, heat capacity, and density that are significantly higher for
water than for many other liquids. In this lesson, we are going to study
water’s ability to act as a solvent. Water is particularly good at
dissolving ionic compounds and very polar molecular substances. By
looking at the properties of a given substance, it is often possible to
predict whether it will dissolve in water. This type of analysis is
aided by understanding the dissolution process on a molecular level.

## Aqueous Solutions {#15.html#x-ck12-QXF1ZW91cyBTb2x1dGlvbnM._1-hah}

An **aqueous solution** is a homogeneous mixture in which the most
abundant component is water. The other substance(s) are typically
introduced in a solid or liquid form and mixed into the water until they
are evenly distributed. For example, if we placed a sample of ethanol in
water and mixed it homogeneously, we would have a solution. Table salt
mixed with water is another example of a solution. More generally, a
**solution** is a homogeneous mixture. The solution component that is
present in the largest amount is called the **solvent** , and all other
substances are referred to as **solutes** . In aqueous solutions, water
is always the solvent.

## Experiments {#15.html#x-ck12-RXhwZXJpbWVudHM._1-v7d}

We are going to visualize some simple experiments to explain how an
aqueous solution is created. This involves placing various common
substances in water and seeing what happens. The substances we will
consider are (1) table salt (NaCl); (2) cane sugar (C ~12~ H ~22~ O ~11~
), and (3) sand (SiO ~2~ ) ( **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTItU29sdXRlcw..) ).

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-MDNjNzliMmUwNThlYjliYmJhYzMwMGNmZjc1MzQ2Yzc.-ov6"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Left to right: Flickr:kevindooley; Douglas P Perkins; Titus Tscharntke" -->
<!-- @@url="Left to right: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sal_%28close%29.jpg; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bowl_of_white_sugar.jpg; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sand_pattern.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Left to right: CC BY 2.0; CC BY 3.0; Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312151498.jpeg)

**Figure 15.10**

Left: Table Salt; Center: Sugar; Right: Sand

</div>

### Scenario 1 – Salt Added to Water {#15.html#x-ck12-U2NlbmFyaW8gMSDigJMgU2FsdCBBZGRlZCB0byBXYXRlcg.._1-bc0}

What will happen when we add table salt to water? At the macroscopic
level? At the molecular level?

If we add a spoonful of table salt to a glass of water, we will notice
that the salt crystals immediately begin to disappear. We can also stir
the solution to speed up the process. Over time, the crystals get
smaller and smaller, and eventually, we will be left with a transparent
solution, assuming we have enough water to dissolve all of the salt.
This process is called **dissolution** . Because dissolution occurs, we
say that salt is **soluble** in water. Any substance that is able to
dissolve in water is described as being water soluble.

Where did the salt go? If we were to measure the mass of the salt and
the mass of the water before mixing them, we would find that the mass of
the solution is simply the sum of its two parts, as expected by the law
of conservation of mass. The salt is still there, it is just no longer
visible. (Interestingly, volume is not additive in the same way, because
the density of the solution is different than the densities of the two
starting materials.) Recall that salt is an ionic substance comprised of
cations and anions bonded tightly together in a crystal lattice. Because
water molecules are polar, they are capable of stabilizing isolated ions
by surrounding each one with the appropriate partial charges. The
process of separating ions from one another is known as **dissociation**
. After the sodium and chloride ions that make up salt have separated
from each other, the compound is said to have dissociated. Here is a
video clip of what dissociation looks like:
[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EBfGcTAJF4o](watch?v=EBfGcTAJF4o) .

Although they appear identical, a solution of sodium chloride has
properties that are significantly different than those of pure water.
For example, pure water is a poor conductor. However, if we pass
electricity through a solution of sodium chloride, we find that it is
quite conductive (see **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTUtQ29uZHVjdGl2aXR5) ).

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-MTFkZjlkZTkxNWQxZWU3MTMxNDgxNWQ1YTdhN2MxMjQ.-cb5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312274425.png)

**Figure 15.11**

Conductivity of a solution of sodium chloride.

</div>

In **Figure** [above](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTUtQ29uZHVjdGl2aXR5)
, the bulb on the right is fully illuminated. Electricity is able to
flow through the circuit because the salt solution is a good conductor.
In contrast, the bulb on the left is not lit, because the poorly
conductive beaker of water provides too much resistance to the complete
electric circuit. Why does this difference occur? In order to conduct
electricity, a substance needs to have charge carriers (either ions or
electrons) that are able to move freely. In pure water, there are
essentially no ions, and all electrons are tightly associated with their
corresponding molecules. However, in the salt solution, plenty of
positively and negatively charged sodium and chloride ions are available
to conduct an electric current. Because this test tells us the relative
number of free ions that are in solution, it can be used to determine
whether a given substance dissociates into separate ions when dissolved
in water.

### Scenario 2 – Sucrose Added to Water {#15.html#x-ck12-U2NlbmFyaW8gMiDigJMgU3Vjcm9zZSBBZGRlZCB0byBXYXRlcg.._1-r80}

In our second scenario, we are going to add cane sugar to water. Again,
the solid will gradually disappear over time, and assuming there is
enough water to dissolve all of the sugar, we will eventually be left
with a clear solution. What would happen if we tested this solution for
conductivity? It turns out that the solution of sugar has a conductivity
similar to that of pure water. Why is this different than when we
dissolved salt? The difference is that sugar is a molecular substance,
not an ionic substance. In general, molecular substances do not
dissociate when dissolved in water, so no ions are formed that can be
used to conduct electricity. (There are some exceptions to this rule. In
particular, strong acids, such as HCl, are often molecular substances
that dissociate into ions when dissolved in water.) The difference
between the dissolution of sodium chloride and sucrose in water is
illustrated in the **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTYtU3VnYXItV2F0ZXI.) .

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-ODkwZmNlNjVkYzMzZTQ0NDFjYTMxMDBiMWQ4MDNjZDg.-x1t"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312400330.png)

**Figure 15.12**

Difference between salt and sucrose dissolving in water.

</div>

Again, notice that all of the sucrose molecules remain completely
intact. No covalent bonds are broken during the dissolution of a
non-acidic molecular substance, only the intermolecular interactions
that hold individual molecules together are disrupted.

### Scenario 3 – Sand Added to Water {#15.html#x-ck12-U2NlbmFyaW8gMyDigJMgU2FuZCBBZGRlZCB0byBXYXRlcg.._1-bhq}

If we were to mix sand and water, no solution would form. No matter how
long we stirred this mixture, the sand would still settle out to the
bottom. Sand and water combine to make a heterogeneous mixture. The
**Figure** [below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTctU2FuZC1XYXRlcg..)
shows this on a large scale.

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-YTIwMWJiOWNiMDBkZTFmMTE1ODE3NWYyNmNlYjViM2I.-sxt"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Flickr:woodleywonderworks" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/73645804@N00/4958435865/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312637385.jpeg)

**Figure 15.13**

Sand mixing with water.

</div>

In order to create a homogeneous aqueous solution, we need the solute to
be soluble in water. Sand is **insoluble** in water, and we can easily
see that the two substances remain separate when mixed. The conductivity
of this system would also be similar to that of pure water, because
neither component is conductive on its own, and no real change occurs
when they are mixed together.

## Lesson Summary {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-rwc}

-   Water is a versatile solvent that can dissolve many ionic and polar
    molecular solutes to make aqueous solutions.
-   The ability of water to dissolve polar and ionic substances is due
    to its own polarity, which provides partial positive and negative
    charges to stabilize isolated ions and molecules.
-   A homogeneous solution is created when a solute dissolves completely
    into a solvent. In a solution, we cannot visually distinguish
    between the solute and solvent.
-   Ionic substances dissociate into ions when they dissolve in water,
    but most molecular substances do not.
-   Not all substances are soluble in water.

## Lesson Review Questions {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-2ul}

1.  How can a solution be classified as aqueous?
2.  What distinguishes solvent and solute?
3.  How are dissolution and dissociation related?
4.  Construct a diagram showing what happens on the molecular level when
    the following substances are added to water:
    1.  A soluble compound that dissociates into ions
    2.  A soluble compound that does not dissociate into ions
    3.  An insoluble compound

5.  You mix 50 mL of pure water with 30 mL of 95% ethanol and stir until
    a completely homogeneous mixture is produced. You then measure the
    new volume of the solution.
    1.  What might you expect the new volume to be?
    2.  When you put the solution into a graduated cylinder, you see
        that it has a volume of 76 mL. What might be your explanation
        for this?

6.  Can you think of substances that are soluble in water under some
    circumstances but not others?
7.  Dirt that gets on our hands can be difficult to remove by rinsing
    with cold water. What are some things that you can do to increase
    the solubility of dirt, making it easier to dissolve in running
    water?
8.  Can you think of an example in which water is the solute instead of
    the solvent?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#15.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-nwa}

-   PhET Dissolving Animation:
    [http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/soluble-salts](soluble-salts)
-   Solubility and solubility rules:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/ch18/soluble.php](soluble.php)
-   Practice quiz on solutions:
    [http://www.chem4kids.com/extras/quiz\_mattersolution/index.html](index.html)

## Points to Consider {#15.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-mwv}

-   Some substances only partially dissociate into ions when dissolved
    in water. How might you test to see the degree to which a substance
    has dissociated?
-   Can you think of a substance that only partially dissolves in water?
-   How can you improve water’s ability to dissolve a substance?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686136] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686137] -->

# Colloids and Suspensions {#15.html#x-ck12-Q29sbG9pZHMgYW5kIFN1c3BlbnNpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-bto}

-   Explain how a mixture can be formed from a dispersed phase and a
    continuous phase and give examples of such mixtures.
-   Describe the characteristics and properties of mixtures like foams,
    aerosols, smoke, suspensions, and sols.
-   Describe the relationship between particle sizes in the dispersed
    phase and the types of mixtures that are produced.
-   Describe the different phases that a dispersed medium exhibits.
-   Describe the different phases that a continuous medium exhibits.
-   Describe the different combinations of dispersed phases and
    continuous phases, and the resulting mixtures that can be formed
    from such combinations.
-   Describe the Tyndall effect, and give examples of this effect in
    suspensions and colloids.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-nxo}

-   **dispersed phase** : A substance that is the solute in a
    colloidal stage.
-   **continuous phase** : Also referred to as the dispersion medium, is
    a solvent in a colloidal stage.
-   **colloid** : A homogeneous mixture in which very small particles
    are distributed evenly throughout another substance; these particles
    do not settle out of solution.
-   **suspension** : A heterogeneous mixture in which solute-like
    particles separate from the solvent-like particles after being
    mixed together.
-   **Tyndall effect** : The phenomenon in which light is scattered by
    very small particles in its path.

## Check Your Understanding {#15.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-je2}

1.  Classify the following items as a homogeneous mixture, a
    heterogeneous mixture, or neither:
    1.  a glass of salt water
    2.  oil and vinegar
    3.  tomato sauce
    4.  milk
    5.  smoke from a fire
    6.  fog

2.  In the following figure, which substance would be the solute, and
    which would be the solvent?

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312803837.png)
</span>

## Introduction {#15.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-euk}

In the previous lesson, we studied how aqueous solutions are formed. Our
focus was on solid or liquid solutes being dissolved by liquid water,
and we assumed that the solutes were either completely soluble or
completely insoluble, producing either homogeneous or heterogeneous
mixtures, respectively. However, there are other situations that are not
as easy to classify. For example, in **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTgtTWF5b25uYWlzZQ..) , we see a
small bowl of mayonnaise. Mayonnaise is a colloid – a mixture that is
not totally homogeneous nor totally heterogeneous. In this lesson, we
are going to expand our study of mixtures to show that solids and gases
can also act as solvents. Additionally, we will look at situations in
which a solute breaks down into particles that are larger than
individual molecules and ions but smaller than, say, a fully intact
grain of sand.

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-NTdiNWM2OTA5ZDRmZWQ3MzQxNDk0NTkxYWY1ZTgyYTk.-xjw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Stacy Spensley" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/notahipster/4059871654/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235312932840.jpeg)

**Figure 15.14**

</div>

## Colloids and Suspensions {#15.html#x-ck12-Q29sbG9pZHMgYW5kIFN1c3BlbnNpb25z_2-jt4}

Solutions are comprised of a solvent and a solute, mixed homogeneously
to produce a transparent fluid. However, there are also mixtures in
which the solute is evenly dispersed, but each solute particle is still
a cluster of more fundamental particles like molecules or ions. The
particle sizes in such mixtures are generally larger than 1 × 10 ^-9^
meters. Such a mixture cannot easily be classified as either homogeneous
or heterogeneous. In such systems, we often use the terms **dispersed
phase** and **continuous phase** (or **dispersion medium** ) in place of
solute and solvent. Each of these phases can consist of a solid, liquid,
or gas. **Table** [below](#15.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MTUuMw..) shows
various combinations of dispersed and continuous phases.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Gas                Liquid             Solid
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  *Continuous Gas    *none* gases are   *liquid aerosol*   *solid aerosol*
  Phase*             miscible           fog, mist          smoke

  *Continuous Liquid *foam* whipped     *emulsion* salad   *suspension or
  Phase*             cream              dressing           sol* paint, ink

  *Continuous Solid  *solid foam*       *gel* jelly        *solid sol* glass
  Phase*             styrofoam                             
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

  :  Dispersed Phase

A mixture of two gases will always be homogeneous. It can be referred to
as a solution, but it is often simply called a gas mixture. When a
gaseous solute is dispersed within a liquid phase (e.g., whipped cream)
or a solid phase (e.g., styrofoam), the result is generally referred to
as a foam. A mixture in which liquid particles are dispersed in a gas
are called aerosols; examples include fog or hair spray. Liquid
particles dispersed into a liquid (e.g., mayonnaise) or solid (e.g.,
jelly) are called emulsions and gels, respectively. A solid dispersed
into a gas, such as smoke, is referred to as a solid aerosol. Solid
particles dispersed into liquids (e.g., paint) or solids (e.g., opaque
glass) are called sols and solid sols, respectively.

We can further differentiate between different mixtures by looking at
the particle size of the dispersed substance ( **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMTktUGFydGljbGUtU2l6ZQ..) ).

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-MjBmZjlkYjMyYzRjZTRmN2ZlYWIxZjVlZGUwZDRiMzI.-gbm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235313048464.png)

**Figure 15.15**

Particle Size and Solution Type

</div>

True solutions generally have particle sizes that are smaller than one
nanometer. The particles in these solutions do not settle over time and
cannot be separated by filters or semi-permeable membranes. The
dispersed particles in **colloids** usually range in size from 10 ^-9^
to 10 ^-7^ meters. These solutions are somewhat transparent, and their
particles do not settle out over time. However, with fine enough
semi-permeable membranes, the dispersed particles in a colloid can be
separated from the bulk solvent. **Suspensions** have the largest
particles sizes, on the order of 10 ^-7^ meters or larger. These
mixtures are opaque, and the particles can be separated by filtration.
Additionally, the particles in a suspension separate over time into
different layers based on the relative densities of the dispersed and
continuous phases.

## Visible Effects of Particle Size {#15.html#x-ck12-VmlzaWJsZSBFZmZlY3RzIG9mIFBhcnRpY2xlIFNpemU._2-bd0}

On the macroscopic scale, variations in particle size can be detected by
the effect they have on light that passes through the mixture. For
example, true solutions are transparent. Some solutions are colored,
which means that certain wavelengths of light are absorbed by molecules
within the mixture. However, the remaining light is transmitted freely
through the mixture. In contrast, the dispersed particles in a colloid
scatter light, resulting in an opaque mixture. The difference can be
seen in **Figure**
[below](#15.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTUtMjAtVHluZGFsbC1FZmZlY3Q.) . The
phenomenon in which light is scattered by very small particles in its
path is known as the **Tyndall effect** .

<div
id="15.html#x-ck12-Yjk5MDFjNGM2OWRiMWQ1NDFkNGY0NzY0NGI4ZDk2YzY.-zbz"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_15_files/20151009235313171457.jpeg)

**Figure 15.16**

Light passing through a true solution and a colloidal solution

</div>

A suspension scatters light even more effectively than a colloid.
Depending on the thickness of the mixture, little to no light will
generally make it all the way through a suspension. Suspensions have a
very opaque appearance.

## Lesson Summary {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-mvz}

-   The dispersed and continuous phases within a mixture can each be in
    any state of matter (i.e., solid, liquid, or gas).
-   Mixtures are often classified differently based on the combinations
    of states (solid, liquid, or gas) represented by the dispersed phase
    and the continuous phase.
-   Homogeneous mixtures with particle sizes smaller than 1 nanometer
    are categorized as true solutions. They are transparent.
-   Mixtures with particle sizes ranging from 10 ^-9^ to 10 ^-7^ meters
    are colloidal mixtures. They are partially transparent but exhibit a
    noticeable Tyndall effect.
-   Mixtures in which the particle sizes are larger than 10 ^-7^ meters
    are called suspensions. These mixtures are completely opaque.

## Lesson Review Questions {#15.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-ytd}

1.  What differentiates the particles that make up colloids and
    suspensions?
2.  How do the dispersed phase and the continuous phase relate to the
    solution components you have learned about?
3.  How can you visibly tell the difference between colloids and
    suspensions?
4.  Categorize each of the following substances as a foam, aerosol,
    emulsion, gel, sol, or solid sol:
    1.  cheese
    2.  butter
    3.  jelly
    4.  shaving cream
    5.  car exhaust

5.  When driving through fog with your headlights on, you may witness
    the Tyndall effect. Explain this in terms of the type of mixture
    that is interacting with the light from the headlights.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#15.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-cng}

-   Review of the differences between suspensions, colloids, and
    solutions:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ROWXs3jtQU](watch?v=3ROWXs3jtQU)
-   Tyndall effect animation:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7eqD-Jw6m4](watch?v=V7eqD-Jw6m4)
-   Classification table of colloids:
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous\_phase](Continuous_phase)

## Points to Consider {#15.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-0ns}

-   If you were to shake a mixture of vinegar and oil, the container
    will often feel cool to the touch. This indicates that energy in the
    form of heat has entered the system. What would your explanation for
    this be?
-   We did not discuss whether or not colloids and suspensions have
    conductive properties. We saw in a previous lesson that some
    solutions are conductive. How might you test whether or not a
    colloid or suspension is conductive?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686137] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#15.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-i5p}

1.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
2.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
3.  George. [http://www.flickr.com/photos/29171973@N00/336013964/]() .
    CC BY 2.0
4.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
5.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
6.  Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
7.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogen-bonding-in-water-2D.png](File:Hydrogen-bonding-in-water-2D.png) .
    Public Domain
8.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
9.  Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coloured-transition-metal-solutions.jpg](File:Coloured-transition-metal-solutions.jpg) .
    Public Domain
10. Left to right: Flickr:kevindooley; Douglas P Perkins;
    Titus Tscharntke. [Left to right:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sal\_%28close%29.jpg;
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bowl\_of\_white\_sugar.jpg;
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sand\_pattern.jpg](File:Sand_pattern.jpg) .
    Left to right: CC BY 2.0; CC BY 3.0; Public Domain
11. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
12. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
13. Flickr:woodleywonderworks.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/73645804@N00/4958435865/]() . CC BY
    2.0
14. Stacy Spensley.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/notahipster/4059871654/]() . CC BY 2.0
15. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
16. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="16.html"></span>

# Solutions {#16.html#x-ck12-U29sdXRpb25z-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_16_files/20151009235321426104.jpeg)
</span>

Solubility describes the extent to which one substance will dissolve in
another. We are going to study factors that affect the solubility of
solids, liquids, and gases in various liquid solvents, particularly
water. In the opening image, we see crystals forming in a solution,
which can occur when the solubility of a given solute-solvent pairing is
exceeded. Our understanding of intermolecular forces will help us to
explain the extent to which substances are soluble in water by looking
at interactions on the molecular level.

^Jon\\ Sullivan.\\ Public\\ Domain.\\ [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Saltflats\_crystals.jpg.](File:Saltflats_crystals.jpg.)^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686141] -->

# Solubility {#16.html#x-ck12-U29sdWJpbGl0eQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-wem}

-   Define the term solubility and describe factors affecting the
    solubility of a particular solution.
-   Predict whether a substance will dissolve or dissociate in water.
    Describe what it means for a solution to be saturated,
    supersaturated, or unsaturated.
-   Define and give examples of both miscible and immiscible mixtures.
-   Explain the statement "like dissolves like" at the molecular level,
    and give specific examples of this concept.
-   Describe how pressure and temperature affect the solubility of a
    liquid or solid in solution.
-   Describe how pressure and temperature affect the solubility of gases
    in solutions, and use Henry's Law to predict the solubility of a gas
    in a solution given the necessary variables.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-pzy}

-   **solubility** : The degree to which a solute dissolves in
    a solvent.
-   **saturated** : The point at which no more solute is able
    to dissolve.
-   **unsaturated** : A solution in which more solute could be
    dissolved, solute concentration is less than predicted by
    solubility properties.
-   **supersaturated** : When the amount of solute dissolved exceeds
    the solubility. Occurs when a solution is saturated and the
    temperature slowly drops.
-   **miscible** : Molecules mix well with one another, and form a
    homogeneous mixture.
-   **immiscible** : Molecules don’t mix well together, and form a
    heterogeneous mixture exhibiting a noticeable bilayer.
-   **van't Hoff factor** : Describes the number of moles of particles
    that dissociate from solid.
-   **Henry's law** : Mathematically describes the relationship between
    the vapor pressure of the solution and the solute concentration.

## Check Your Understanding {#16.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-we6}

1.  What type of intermolecular forces will exist between molecules of
    the following substances?
    1.  H ~2~ O
    2.  CO ~2~
    3.  CH ~4~
    4.  N ~2~
    5.  CO
    6.  NH ~3~

## Introduction {#16.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-epq}

Have you ever wondered why it is easier to stir sugar into hot tea
rather than into ice tea? Or, why no matter how much you shake a jar of
oil and vinegar, it always seems to separate? These observations can be
explained by a property of solutions known as solubility. In this
section, you'll learn how molecular structure and binding forces
contribute to the solubility properties of various solutions and
mixtures.

## Solubility {#16.html#x-ck12-U29sdWJpbGl0eQ..-cm2}

**Solubility** is the degree to which a given solute dissolves in a
particular solvent. It depends on various factors, including temperature
and pressure. A common way to express the solubility of a given
solute-solvent pair is to state the maximum amount of solute that can be
dissolved by 100 grams of the solvent. The temperature dependence of the
solubilities for various compounds in water is shown in **Figure**
[below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDItU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) .

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-OTBhZDExYWE2ZGRlN2I2NDg1ZjRlMDcxMTk4NDAxY2Y.-7rh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235321561415.png)

**Figure 16.1**

Solubility Curve for Ionic Solids

</div>

The aqueous solubility of a given substance is determined experimentally
by dissolving increasing amounts into a known mass of water at a
specific temperature until no more solid dissolves. A solution that
cannot hold any more of a given solute is said to be **saturated** . For
example, in **Figure**
[above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDItU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) we see
that the solubility of sodium nitrate (NaNO ~3~ ) is approximately 90 g
per 100 g of H ~2~ O at 20°C. At this temperature, a 100 gram sample of
H ~2~ O in which 90 grams of sodium nitrate is dissolved would be
saturated, and a solution in which less sodium nitrate is dissolved
would be **unsaturated** . Note that this ratio also holds for samples
in which the solvent is present in different amounts; 50 grams of water
would hold 45 grams of sodium nitrate at 20°C, and 300 grams of water
would hold 270 g of NaNO ~3~ . Notice that even relative solubilities of
various compounds are temperature dependent. For example, at 20°C, KCl
has a higher solubility than NaCl, but at 50°C, this relationship is
reversed.

Solutions can also become **supersaturated** , where the amount of
solute dissolved exceeds its solubility. Supersaturation most commonly
occurs when a saturated solution is slowly cooled. They occur frequently
in geological and meteorological processes. Supersaturated systems are
unstable, and eventually, the solute will precipitate until a saturated
solution is regenerated. We can quantify supersaturation by looking at
solubility curves. If the ratio of solute to solvent is above the
saturation curve at the given temperature, the solution is
supersaturated. If it is on the curve, the solution is saturated, and if
it is below the curve, the solution is unsaturated.

Solubility can be described for any solute-solvent pairing, but because
water is such a fundamentally important solvent, we are mainly focusing
on aqueous solutions.

**Example 16.1**

You dissolve 40 g of KCl in 100 g of water at 40°C. You then cool the
solution to 20°C, during which you notice solid KCl precipitating. How
many grams of KCl would you expect to precipitate?

*Answer:*

Consult **Figure**
[above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDItU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) to
find the solubility of KCl at 20°C (approximately 32 g KCl/100 g H ~2~
O). Therefore, we would expect approximately 8 g KCl to precipitate out
(40 g – 32 g = 8 g).

## Factors Affecting Solubility {#16.html#x-ck12-RmFjdG9ycyBBZmZlY3RpbmcgU29sdWJpbGl0eQ..-60j}

There are three main factors that control solubility.

1.  Identities of the solute and solvent
2.  Temperature
3.  Pressure (for gases only)

### Solute and Solvent {#16.html#x-ck12-U29sdXRlIGFuZCBTb2x2ZW50-867}

Ultimately, the ability of a solute to dissolve in a particular solvent
will be dictated by the relative favorability of solute-solvent
interactions compared to solute-solute and solvent-solvent interaction.
In particular, the polarity of these two substances has a major effect
on whether a significant amount of solute is able to dissolve. Polar
solutes are typically quite soluble in polar solvents (e.g., ethanol in
water), and nonpolar solutes generally dissolve well in nonpolar
solvents (e.g., grease in gasoline). Conversely, polar solutes will have
low solubilities in nonpolar solvents (e.g., NaCl in CCl ~4~ ), and
solubilities will be low for nonpolar solutes in polar solvents (e.g.,
oil in vinegar).

### Temperature {#16.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmU.-hau}

As you can see in **Figure**
[above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDItU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) ,
solid and liquid solutes generally become more soluble as the
temperature increases. This is true for solvents other than water as
well. This effect varies quite a bit by substance. For example, the
solubility of KNO ~3~ has a very strong temperature dependence (its
solubility curve has a large slope), whereas the solubility of NaCl is
minimally influenced by temperature (its solubility curve is nearly
flat). For gaseous solutes, solubility *decreases* at higher
temperatures. We will look more at this effect later in the lesson.

### Pressure {#16.html#x-ck12-UHJlc3N1cmU.-ged}

Higher pressures increase the solubility of gases. You are probably
familiar with this concept as it relates to carbonated beverages. Before
opening the container, the inside is pressurized, so a large amount of
CO ~2~ is dissolved in the liquid. After opening, the pressure decreases
(to the ambient pressure), so the solubility of CO ~2~ drops, causing it
to bubble out of solution. Because they are not compressible like gases,
solid and liquid solutes do not have noticeable changes in solubility at
different external pressures.

## A Review of Intermolecular Forces {#16.html#x-ck12-QSBSZXZpZXcgb2YgSW50ZXJtb2xlY3VsYXIgRm9yY2Vz-mlt}

Our understanding of the behavior of solutes and solvents can be largely
explained at the molecular level using our model of intermolecular
forces. Some substances will mix freely while others barely mix at all.
This is due to the interactions between particles of the solvent and
solute. Recall that nonpolar molecular substances are held together in
the solid and liquid phases by relatively weak London dispersion forces,
in which induced dipoles line up into a favorable arrangement. An
example of this is the interactions found between molecules of iodine (I
~2~ ). In contrast, polar molecules are held together by stronger
dipole-dipole interactions. Additionally, molecules that contain N-H,
O-H, or F-H bonds exhibit a special dipole-dipole interaction called
hydrogen bonding, which is unusually strong even for a polar
interaction. Ammonia (NH ~3~ ) and water are examples of small molecules
that exhibit hydrogen bonding. The cations and anions in an ionic
compound are held together by very strong ionic bonds, but ion-dipole
interactions are nearly as strong. Ion-dipole interactions would be
found, for example, when an ionic substance like NaCl is dissolved in
water. Each ion is attracted to the appropriate end of the dipole on
surrounding molecules of water.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-NzQ0ZDIyNGQ3YmI4Zjg1MGIzNzBiY2FjYTk5OTBiMjE.-d9p"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235321804934.png)

**Figure 16.2**

Decision tree for types of intermolecular interactions

</div>

## Liquid Solutes {#16.html#x-ck12-TGlxdWlkIFNvbHV0ZXM.-dk6}

When combining two liquids, we can generally predict whether they will
mix to form a homogeneous solution or not by looking at the relative
polarity of each substance. We will consider three scenarios: the
combination of two polar liquids, the combination of one polar and one
nonpolar liquid, and the mixing of two nonpolar liquids.

### Polar-Polar Interactions {#16.html#x-ck12-UG9sYXItUG9sYXIgSW50ZXJhY3Rpb25z-i4h}

Polar-polar interactions occur when two or more polar liquids are mixed.
An example of this is when methanol mixes with water. Both of these are
small polar molecules containing O-H bonds, which means that they can
both participate in hydrogen bonding. **Figure**
[below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDQtTWV0aGFub2w.) shows molecules of
methanol and water connected by hydrogen bonds. Because of these strong
interactions, the two substances mix freely to form a homogeneous
mixture; they are **miscible** . One way to remember this interaction is
the phrase "like dissolves like." In this case, a polar solvent
dissolves polar solutes.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-MmI3NzFmN2E2ODIxYmRhNTMwNTllOWY4ZTJiMWIyYzc.-wlr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:J&#252;/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methanol_Hydrogen_Bridge_V.2.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235321936120.png)

**Figure 16.3**

Hydrogen bonding between methanol and water.

</div>

### Nonpolar-Polar Interactions {#16.html#x-ck12-Tm9ucG9sYXItUG9sYXIgSW50ZXJhY3Rpb25z-xou}

Toluene (C ~6~ H ~5~ CH ~3~ is an organic compound that is often used as
a solvent in paint thinners. Toluene is a nonpolar compound. When mixed
with water, the two substances will separate into two layers rather than
forming a homogeneous solution; these two liquids are **immiscible** .
Toluene is a nonpolar chain that cannot form hydrogen bonds with water.
Dissolving this chain in water would break up the strong hydrogen bonds
between water molecules and replace them with weaker dispersion forces.
This is generally not energetically favorable, so the liquids tend to
separate themselves to maximize the number of strong attractive
interactions.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YzJiOWMyZmFiNjc1YmM0NzBkZWQzZWU5NjM4MDVhMGU.-1cu"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Toluol.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235322063540.png)

**Figure 16.4**

</div>

**Example 16.2**

Can you think of two other liquids that are immiscible and form a
heterogeneous mixture?

*Answer:*

Another familiar example is the mixing of vinegar and olive oil. Olive
oil is a nonpolar substance, while vinegar (which is mostly water and
acetic acid) is polar. The result is a heterogeneous mixture that
exhibits a bilayer.

### Nonpolar-Nonpolar Interactions {#16.html#x-ck12-Tm9ucG9sYXItTm9ucG9sYXIgSW50ZXJhY3Rpb25z-qgc}

Nonpolar-nonpolar interactions occur when two nonpolar liquids are
mixed. An example of this is the interaction between toluene and octane
(see **Figures** [above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDUtVG9sdWVuZQ..)
and [below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDYtT2N0YW5l) ). The
interactions between a molecule of toluene and a molecule of octane are
relatively weak, but so are the toluene-toluene and octane-octane
interactions. Because no strong intermolecular forces (like those
between water molecules) need to be broken for mixing to occur, no
strong interactions need to be formed in order for mixing to be a
favorable process. Toluene and octane will form a homogeneous mixture.
The phrase "like dissolves like" applies to these mixtures as well. In
this case, nonpolar dissolves nonpolar.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-NWEyZTU0YzcwOWI1NDA4MWJiZmMxOTQzZDc0YjI3NmI.-2rm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Bangin/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Octane.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235322185865.png)

**Figure 16.5**

</div>

**Example 16.3**

Can you think of another example of a nonpolar-nonpolar interaction
between two different liquids that form a homogeneous mixture?

*Answer:*

*Another example of a nonpolar-nonpolar interaction between two
different liquids would be the mixing of motor oil and gasoline. Both of
these substances are nonpolar, so they are miscible and form a
homogeneous mixture when combined.*

## Solid Solutes {#16.html#x-ck12-U29saWQgU29sdXRlcw..-ibz}

Solutions can also be comprised of a solid solute and a liquid solvent.
These interactions are governed by the same three interactions we
discussed earlier: polar-polar, nonpolar-polar, and nonpolar-nonpolar.
The **Table** [below](#16.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MTYuMg..) describes these
interactions.

  Solid (solute)   Liquid (solvent)   Example           Result
  ---------------- ------------------ ----------------- -----------------------
  polar            polar              NaCl + H ~2~ O    Homogeneous solution
  nonpolar         polar              I ~2~ + H ~2~ O   Heterogeneous mixture
  polar            nonpolar           NaCl + Toluene    Heterogeneous mixture
  nonpolar         nonpolar           I ~2~ + Toluene   Homogeneous mixture

**Example 16.4**

Using the data in the **Table**
[above](#16.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MTYuMg..) , could you replace the solute
or the solvent in the heterogeneous mixtures with another material to
make them homogeneous?

*Answer:*

There are several combinations that could be described. For instance, in
the polar-nonpolar mixture between NaCl and toluene, the NaCl could be
replaced with a nonpolar solid, like I ~2~ , or the toluene could be
replaced with a polar substance, like water.

### Ionic Solids in Water {#16.html#x-ck12-SW9uaWMgU29saWRzIGluIFdhdGVy-rlt}

When placed in water, ionic solids dissolve to varying degrees. Some
ionic solids have a high solubility in water (e.g., NaCl), while others
barely dissolve at all (e.g., AgCl). Still others are moderately soluble
(e.g., Ag ~2~ CO ~3~ ). The solubility rules we studied in the chapter
on *Chemical Reactions* provide guidelines for predicting the relative
solubility of a given ionic compound in water. In this chapter, we will
focus primarily on water-soluble ionic solids.

When a soluble ionic solid is added to water, it interacts with water
molecules and dissociates into isolated ions that diffuse out into the
solution. These charged particles become solvated by surrounding water
molecules ( **Figure**
[below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDctU29sdmF0aW9u) ). Although the
strong ionic bonds in the solid are broken up, they are replaced by
numerous favorable interactions between the charged ions and the partial
charges on the appropriate ends of the polar water molecules.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YTNlYWM5MDhlYTM2ZmMwZTRjMTc2Y2U5NGIxZTUzZTU.-uiz"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Taxman/De.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Na%2BH2O.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235322301132.png)

**Figure 16.6**

</div>

Notice that for each unit of NaCl that dissolves, two particles are
freed into solution, the Na ^+^ cation and the Cl ^-^ anion. This means
that if one mole of NaCl is dissolved, 2 moles of solute particles are
found in the homogeneous solution (one mole of each ion). This
dissociation is quantified by something called the **van’t Hoff factor**
. The van’t Hoff factor (i) describes the number of moles of solute
particles that are found in a solution when one mole of a substance is
completely dissolved. The van’t Hoff factor for NaCl would be expressed
as i = 2.

**Example 16.5**

If one mole of magnesium fluoride (MgF ~2~ ) is added to water and fully
dissociates, how many moles of particles will be formed?

*Answer:*

We can describe the dissociation of magnesium fluoride as follows:

MgF ~2~ → Mg ^2+^ + 2 F ^-^

Each unit of magnesium fluoride contains three ions (one Mg ^2+^ ion and
two F ^-^ ions). Using the van’t Hoff factor to describe this
dissociation, we would say that i = 3, because three moles of ions are
produced from the dissociation of one mole of the ionic solid.

## Gas Solutes {#16.html#x-ck12-R2FzIFNvbHV0ZXM.-zxg}

Gases are also capable of dissolving in liquids. There are many examples
of this in our everyday lives. For example, carbonated beverages contain
dissolved carbon dioxide. We notice this when bubbles come out of
solution when the beverage is opened. Another example is when oxygen
from the air we breathe dissolves in our blood, where it is transported
throughout the body. Fish and other aquatic organisms use gills to
capture dissolved oxygen from their environments.

Because determining the mass of a gaseous sample is generally less
convenient than determining how many moles are present, solubilities for
gases are often expressed as concentrations instead of as the mass that
can be dissolved in a specified amount of solvent. A solution in which
one mole of a gas is dissolved in one liter of solution has a
concentration of 1 molar (1 M). Because the solubility of most gases is
much less than that, the molar solubility is often given in millimolar
(mM). A one millimolar solution contains 1/1000 mol of solute per liter
of solution. Other methods of expressing concentration, such as parts
per million (ppm) or parts per billion (ppb), will be discussed in the
following lesson.

**Example 16.6**

What does it mean if the molar solubility of a gas is 2.0 mM?

*Answer:*

Each liter of solution can hold a maximum of 2.0 millimoles of that
particular gas at the indicated temperature and pressure.

### Temperature Effects {#16.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmUgRWZmZWN0cw..-cb1}

As with all substances, the solubility of gases is temperature
dependent. However, in contrast to the situation for most solids and
liquids, higher temperatures will decrease the solubility of a gaseous
solute. **Figure**
[below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDgtU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) shows
this relationship with several common gases.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YzljNDY1NjJjYTEwNmVkZGIyYmM0N2YwODIzZTZhZjQ.-fzr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So and Steven Lai" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235322608119.png)

**Figure 16.7**

Solubility-temperature curves for various common gases.

</div>

This inverse relationship between solubility and temperature can be
understood by looking at a molecular model. Recall that higher
temperatures are associated with faster particles. Gas particles are
held in solution by attractive interactions with the solvent molecules.
If the particles are moving slowly, these attractive forces will pull
back any particles that try to escape the surface of the solution and
re-enter the gas phase. However, if the gas particles are moving fast
enough, these interactions will not be sufficiently strong to prevent
this process from occurring. As a result, more particles are able to
escape, and the amount of dissolved solute is less than it would be at a
lower temperature.

### Pressure Effects {#16.html#x-ck12-UHJlc3N1cmUgRWZmZWN0cw..-3vi}

At a constant temperature, the amount a given gas that dissolves in a
given type and volume of liquid is directly proportional to the partial
pressure of that gas in the area immediately adjacent to the solution.
This principle is called **Henry’s Law** and is illustrated in
**Figure** [below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDktUHJlc3N1cmU.) .

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-MjM4MzE2OThiMzAyNjVlNzgyZWNkMDcyNmE4MWMyY2Q.-diw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235322742245.png)

**Figure 16.8**

Illustration of pressure effects on gas solubility.

</div>

Mathematically, Henry's Law is expressed as follows:

ρ = *k ~H~ c*

where ρ is the partial pressure of the gas, *c* is its molar solubility
at the given temperature and pressure, and *k ~H~* is a constant that
depends on the temperature and the identities of both the solute and
solvent. Some k ~H~ values for various gases dissolved in water at 298 K
are presented in the **Table** [below](#16.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MTYuMw..)
.

  Gas      Constant (Pa•mol ^-1^ •L)   Constant (atm•mol ^-1^ •L)
  -------- --------------------------- ----------------------------
  He       282.7 × 10 ^6^              2865
  O ~2~    74.68 × 10 ^6^              756.7
  N ~2~    155\. × 10 ^6^              1600.
  H ~2~    121.2 × 10 ^6^              1228
  CO ~2~   2.937 × 10 ^6^              29.76
  NH ~3~   5.69 × 10 ^6^               56.9

If we solve the Henry's Law equation for the molar solubility, we get
the following useful relationship:

![c=\\frac{\\rho}{k\_H}](ck12_math_images_dir/ea8b80b347d6d013f029f89cb72feaa3.png)

**Example 16.7**

What are the molar solubilities of oxygen gas and nitrogen gas in pure
water at 298 K and 1 atm of pressure? Which gas is more soluble under
these conditions?

![c \\underset{\\text{O}\_2}{} &= \\frac{1 \\ \\text{atm}}{756.7 \\
\\text{atm}\\cdot\\text{mol}\^{-1}\\text{L}} \\\\\\&= 0.00132 \\
\\text{mol/L} \\\\\\&= 1.32 \\ \\text{mM} \\\\\\c
\\underset{\\text{N}\_2}{} &= \\frac{1 \\ \\text{atm}}{1600. \\
\\text{atm}\\cdot\\text{mol}\^{-1}\\text{L}} \\\\\\&= 0.000625 \\
\\text{mol/L} \\\\\\&= 0.625 \\
\\text{mM}](ck12_math_images_dir/a78b148733575059663f865f2a0879ff.png)

Oxygen gas is more soluble under these conditions. A saturated solution
of O ~2~ would have a concentration of 1.32 mM, whereas a saturated
solution of N ~2~ would have a concentration of 0.625 mM.

## Lesson Summary {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-qeh}

-   Solubility describes the degree to which a solute will dissolve in a
    particular solvent.
-   Water is a common solvent for dissolving various solids, liquids,
    and gases.
-   The solubilities of solids and liquids are commonly expressed as
    grams of solute that can be dissolved by 100 g of water at a
    specified temperature.
-   Solutions can be unsaturated, saturated, or supersaturated,
    depending on the relationship between the solubility of a substance
    and the amount that is actually dissolved.
-   The solubility of gases, liquids, and solids are affected by changes
    in temperature.
-   Solutes and solvents that have similar polarities (i.e., both are
    polar, or both are nonpolar) tend to mix well, creating
    homogeneous solutions. Solutes and solvents with very different
    polarities (i.e., one is polar, and the other is nonpolar) often do
    not mix well, resulting in the formation of heterogeneous mixtures.
-   The solubilities of gases are often described as concentrations
    (i.e., mM or M) rather than the mass that can be dissolved by a
    given mass of solvent.
-   The solubility of a gaseous solute is inversely related to the
    temperature of the solvent and directly proportional to the partial
    pressure of the gas in the surrounding atmosphere.
-   Henry’s law describes the mathematical relationship between the
    concentration of a gaseous solute and its partial pressure in the
    gas above the solution.

## Lesson Review Questions {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-nwd}

1.  Draw the mixture that would be formed when oil and water
    are combined.
2.  Give an example of molecular solid that dissolves in water due to
    polar-polar interactions.
3.  Ammonia (NH ~3~ ) dissolves well in water. Explain how this
    interaction might occur and the type(s) of intermolecular forces
    that would be involved.
4.  Using the solubility-temperature curve in **Figure**
    [above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDItU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) ,
    describe conditions under which a solution of potassium chloride
    would be unsaturated, saturated, and supersaturated at 20°C.
5.  A solution is formed by dissolving 10. grams of potassium chlorate
    in 100. g of water at 30°C. If the solution were heated to 40°C, how
    many more grams of solute could be dissolved?
6.  A solution that is saturated with both methane and oxygen gas at 1
    atm and 20°C is then heated to 40°C. What will happen to the
    dissolved gases as the temperature increases? Referring back to
    **Figure**
    [above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMDgtU29sdWJpbGl0eS1DdXJ2ZQ..) ,
    how much of each gas would leave the solution? How much would
    remain?
7.  Which of the gases in **Table**
    [above](#16.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MTYuMw..) would have the highest
    solubility in water at 298 K? Which would have the lowest
    solubility?
8.  Urea (CH ~4~ N ~2~ O) is a molecular solid that has a relatively
    high solubility in water (see **Figure**
    [below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMTAtVXJlYQ..) ). How would you
    account for this fact?

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-NDgxZGI1Y2I4MGQ5MTQ2NjRmYTJhZWY1MTI2NDdmZDE.-rvn"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harnstoff.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235322897184.png)

**Figure 16.9**

The molecular structure for urea.

</div>

9.  Which of the following substances would dissolve better in water:
    iodine crystals (I ~2~ ) or liquid methanol (CH ~3~ OH)? How would
    you categorize the resulting solute-solvent interactions?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#16.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-yos}

-   Solubility-pressure curves for a variety of gases:
    [http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/gases-solubility-water-d\_1148.html](gases-solubility-water-d_1148.html)
-   Supersaturated solution demonstration:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1PDE5OawuI](watch?v=D1PDE5OawuI)

## Points to Consider {#16.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-pb6}

-   When you open a can of soda or sparkling water, you can usually see
    some gas escape or bubble out of the can. Based on the relationship
    between pressure and gas solubility, why might this occur?
-   Why do you suppose it is better to wash your dishes with warm water
    than with cold water? Explain these effects in terms of solubility.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686141] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686142] -->

# Solution Concentration {#16.html#x-ck12-U29sdXRpb24gQ29uY2VudHJhdGlvbg..}

## Lesson Objectives {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-jfw}

-   Describe the concept of concentration as it applies to solutions,
    and explain how concentration can be increased or decreased.
-   Define molarity and molality, including the most commonly used units
    for each measurement.
-   Define weight percent and be able to determine the weight percent of
    a solute in a given solution.
-   Understand how a dilution changes the concentration of a solution,
    and be able to perform calculations related to this process.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-ldc}

-   **molarity (M)** : Moles of solute per liter of solution (mol/L).
-   **molality (m)** : Moles of solute per kilogram of solvent (mol/kg).
-   **weight percent (w/w)** : The weight of solute divided by the
    weight of solution, expressed as a percentage.
-   **parts per million (ppm)** : The number of particles of a certain
    solute divided by the total number of particles in a solution,
    converted to number of particles of solute per one million particles
    of solution.
-   **dilution** : The process of lowering the concentration of a
    solution by adding more solvent.

## Check Your Understanding {#16.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-qso}

1.  Which of the following statements is false regarding a solution?
    1.  The amount of solute is always less than the amount of solvent.
    2.  Water is a common solvent.
    3.  You can have a solution where there is zero solute.
    4.  Polar solutes will likely dissolve in polar solvents.

## Introduction {#16.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-xma}

A solution is comprised of at least two components - the solvent and one
or more solutes. Although many different substances (including solids,
liquids, and gases) can act as a solvent, we are now going to focus
primarily on aqueous solutions, in which water acts as the solvent.
Water is the most common solvent that we encounter in our daily lives.
In this section, we will explain how to determine the concentration for
a given solution and how to create solutions of known concentrations.

## Solution Concentration {#16.html#x-ck12-U29sdXRpb24gQ29uY2VudHJhdGlvbg.._1-e3k}

In its most general form, concentration describes the number of items in
a given area or volume. The units generally depend on the types of items
being counted. For example, if we were to calculate the concentration of
people that live in a city, we would divide the total number of people
by the area. If we measured the area in square miles, the units of
concentration for this measurement would be people per square mile. Or,
we could determine the concentration of fish in a lake by dividing the
total number of fish by the volume of the lake. If we measure the volume
in cubic meters, the concentration would have units of fish per cubic
meter.

To express the concentration of a solution, we can perform a similar
calculation. The amount of solute is commonly measured in terms of
moles, but it can also be measured by mass or by total number of
particles. We can then divide this value by either the amount of solvent
or the total amount of solution. These values may have units of mass,
volume, moles, or number of particles. Depending on how each component
is measured, we get different ways to measure concentration. In this
lesson, we will learn about four different ways to describe the
concentration of a solution:

1.  Molarity - moles of solute divided by volume (in liters)
    of solution.
2.  Molality - moles of solute divided by mass (in kilograms)
    of solvent.
3.  Weight percent - mass of solute divided by mass of solution.
4.  Parts per million (or parts per billion) - particles of solute
    divided by particles of solution.

Each of these ways of describing concentration will be discussed further
below.

### Molarity {#16.html#x-ck12-TW9sYXJpdHk._1-fzr}

The most common way to express the concentration of a solution is by
determining its molarity. The **molarity** of a solution tells us how
many moles of solute are present in each liter of solution. It can be
calculated as follows:

Molarity = ![\\mathrm{\\frac{mol \\ solute}{L \\
solution}}](ck12_math_images_dir/30fe25e970c43eb35e56962e2b8ce3ad.png)

Molarity has units of moles per liter (mol/L). Moles per liter is also
given the abbreviated name **molar** (M). For example, a solution that
contains 2 moles of solute in each liter of solution would be a 2 molar
(2 M) solution.

**Example 16.8**

What is the molarity (M) of a 3.4 liter sample of a solution that
contains 0.32 moles of NaCl?

*Answer:*

M ~NaCl~ = ![\\mathrm{\\frac{0.32 \\ mol \\ NaCl}{3.4 \\
L}}](ck12_math_images_dir/5b11d4e4cb38383bf5c86325c00c23cf.png) = 0.094
M

When indicating solution concentration in molarity, a bracket notation
is often used. For instance, from the previous example we could write:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZWRiMGExNWQ2MmViOWFlODcwOWYxMzgyZDhhNTkyNGE.-dfl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWRiMGExNWQ2MmViOWFlODcwOWYxMzgyZDhhNTkyNGE.-rhm">
<dd>
\[NaCl\]=0.094

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This indicates a 0.094 M solution of sodium chloride.

### Making Solutions of a Specific Molarity {#16.html#x-ck12-TWFraW5nIFNvbHV0aW9ucyBvZiBhIFNwZWNpZmljIE1vbGFyaXR5_1-yar}

To make a solution with a particular concentration of a given solute,
the following procedure can be used:

1.  Calculate the moles of solute that would be present in the entire
    desired solution, and then use the molar mass of the solute to
    calculate the mass that you will need.
2.  Weigh out the appropriate amount of solute, and place it in a
    volumetric flask.
3.  Fill the flask about halfway with solvent, and swirl until the
    solute is completely dissolved.
4.  Finally, add enough solvent so that the meniscus of the solution
    lines up with the calibration mark on the flask.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-gjp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235323053862.png)

**Figure 16.10**

</div>

**Example 16.9**

You want to make a 0.154 M solution of sodium chloride (the approximate
concentration of a standard saline solution). Describe how you would
prepare 1.00 L of this solution.

*Answer:*

*Step 1* : Calculate

The molarity of our solution is going to be 0.154 M, and the total
volume will be 1.00 L. Plugging these values into the definition of
molarity will allow us to calculate the necessary moles of solute.

![\\text{M} &= \\mathrm{\\frac{mol}{L}} \\\\\\\\text{mol} &= \\text{M}
\\times \\text{L} \\\\\\&= (0.154 \\ \\text{M}) \\times (1.00 \\
\\text{L}) \\\\\\&= 0.154 \\ \\text{mol
NaCl}](ck12_math_images_dir/282ad60298de39a7599866ded734f5c2.png)

Because we will be measuring out NaCl by mass, we need to determine the
mass of 0.154 moles of NaCl using its molar mass (58.44 g/mol).

![0.154 \\ \\text{mol NaCl} \\times \\frac{58.44 \\ \\text{g NaCl}}{1 \\
\\text{mol NaCl}} =9.00 \\ \\text{g
NaCl}](ck12_math_images_dir/ea7dd0834cede3882d73dce147263992.png)

*Step 2* : Weigh out 9.00 g of NaCl and place it in a 1 L volumetric
flask.

*Step 3* : Fill the flask about halfway with water, and swirl until the
NaCl is completely dissolved.

*Step 4* : Add more water until the meniscus of the solution lines up
with the calibration mark. Mix well.

### Molality {#16.html#x-ck12-TW9sYWxpdHk._1-uet}

Another way to express the concentration of a solution is by determining
its molality. The **molality** ( *m* ) of a solution tells us how many
moles of solute are combined with each kilogram of solvent. Note that
there are two differences between molarity and molality. Molality uses
mass instead of volume, and we are looking at the amount of *solvent*
instead of the total amount of *solution* . It can be calculated as
follows:

molality = ![\\mathrm{\\frac{moles \\ solute}{kg \\
solvent}}](ck12_math_images_dir/cd31c61b59767577fd82090872338ad0.png)

Molality is primarily useful for calculating certain physical properties
of solutions, such as freezing point, boiling point, and vapor pressure.
These will be discussed in the next lesson.

**Example 16.10**

What would be the molality of a sugar solution in which 4.00 g C ~6~ H
~12~ O ~6~ was dissolved in 1.00 L of water? Water has a density of 1.00
g/mL.

*Answer:*

<dl id="x-ck12-jpl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hci">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-svs">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{molality = \\frac{moles \\ solute}{kg \\
solvent}}](ck12_math_images_dir/73d7a673c77d94882d7c5879caf17faa.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
We need to find the amount of solute (sugar) in moles and the mass of
the solvent in kilograms.

<dl id="x-ck12-ljx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-mdh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fb9">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{moles \\ solute = 4.00 \\ g \\ C\_6H\_{12}O\_6 \\times
\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ C\_6H\_{12}O\_6}{342.30 \\ g \\ C\_6H\_{12}O\_6} =
0.0117 \\ mol \\
C\_6H\_{12}O\_6}](ck12_math_images_dir/fc608cf7d4ac806c5c8a0616c2784f4f.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uid">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zbl">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{kg \\ solvent = 1.00 \\ L \\ H\_2O \\times \\frac{1000 \\ mL
\\ H\_2O}{1 \\ L \\ H\_2O} \\times \\frac{1.00 \\ g \\ H\_2O}{1 \\ mL \\
H\_2O} \\times \\frac{1 \\ kg}{1000 \\ g} = 1.00 \\ kg \\
H\_2O}](ck12_math_images_dir/c00a309502ccab243cc77113c8a709a4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Substituting these values into our molality expression, we get the
following:

<dl id="x-ck12-kh3">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-4wb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-va8">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{molality = \\frac{0.0117 \\ mol \\ NaCl}{1.00 \\ kg \\
H\_2O}= 0.0117 \\
m}](ck12_math_images_dir/8f83b0950b0394de1a05bdd9190dbc21.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
### Weight Percent {#16.html#x-ck12-V2VpZ2h0IFBlcmNlbnQ._1-nme}

Another way to express the concentration of a solution is by its weight
percent. This is commonly used to describe stock solutions of things
like acids and bases. **Weight percent** can be calculated by dividing
the mass of a solute by the mass of the entire solution:

<dl id="x-ck12-k2h">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uzk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-yyi">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Weight \\ Percent=\\frac{grams \\ of \\ solute}{grams \\ of
\\ solution} \\times
100\\%}](ck12_math_images_dir/20b0ae250a6ed69099bb51aab10fa42a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
A solution in which 9.3% of the mass is due to NaCl would be referred to
as a 9.3% (w/w) NaCl solution. The presence of "(w/w)" indicates that
the ratio is between the weight (mass) of the solute and the weight of
the total solution. Other ratios in which one or both of the components
are measured in terms of volume instead of mass are also common; these
percentages are labeled as either weight/volume (w/v) or volume/volume
(v/v).

**Example 16.11**

What is the weight percent of a solution that has 9.01 g of NaCl
dissolved in 1000. g of water?

*Answer:*

Grams of solution = grams of NaCl + grams of water = 9.01 g NaCl + 1000
g H ~2~ O = 1009 g solution

<dl id="x-ck12-zas">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qzi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-tpi">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Weight \\ Percent=\\frac{9.01 \\ g \\ NaCl}{1009 \\ g \\
solution} \\times
100\\%=0.893\\%}](ck12_math_images_dir/c1174dac00ce072f6674b058a9bc5a78.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This mixture could be described as a 0.893% (w/w) solution of NaCl in
water.

### Parts Per Million {#16.html#x-ck12-UGFydHMgUGVyIE1pbGxpb24._1-4cp}

We can also express concentrations by dividing the number of particles
of a certain solute by the total number of particles in a solution.
These types of values are commonly used to describe small amounts of a
substance in a complex mixture. Common units for this type of
concentration are **parts per million** (ppm) and parts per billion
(ppb). Let's say we have a sample of water in which Pb ^2+^ is present
at a concentration of 20 ppm. This would mean that if we randomly took a
million particles from our solution, 20 of them (on average) would be Pb
^2+^ ions. The rest would be mostly water molecules, with a possibility
of the presence of various other ions. The maximum allowable
concentrations of various toxic gases in the air or heavy metal ions in
drinking water are often reported in units of ppm or ppb.

If given information on aqueous solution concentration by ppm, these
units can be converted to molarity or molality using the following
conversion factor:

<dl id="x-ck12-NDdhNWNjZTM1MWNkMGM0MWFkY2E3MWUzMTU0YWNiOGI.-j3z">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDdhNWNjZTM1MWNkMGM0MWFkY2E3MWUzMTU0YWNiOGI.-frh">
<dd>
1 ppm= 1 mg/ L

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This conversion is derived from the fact that ppm is really just a ratio
between amount of solute and amount of solution. If you had a 1 ppm
solution, this would indicate 1 g of solute per 1 × 10 ^6^ g of
solution. Assuming an aqueous solution density of 1 g/mL as is standard
for water, this indicates 1 g of solute per 1 × 10 ^6^ mL of solution,
or 1 mg of solute per 1 L of solution. You can use this conversion unit
and a similar conversion method for converting concentration from ppm or
ppb.

## Dilutions {#16.html#x-ck12-RGlsdXRpb25z_1-bgn}

Many chemicals that we use on a daily basis are transported in a
concentrated form but used in a more diluted form. For example,
concentrated cleaners are often diluted before they are used. To perform
a **dilution** , pure solvent is added to a concentrated solution in
order to make a less concentrated (more dilute) solution. The resultant
solution will contain the same amount of solute but a greater amount of
solvent. It will therefore have a lower concentration than the original
solution. When performing a simple dilution, the concentration and
volume of the initial solution are related to the new concentration and
volume as follows:

M ~1~ V ~1~ = M ~2~ V ~2~

M ~1~ = initial molarity, V ~1~ = initial volume

M ~2~ = final molarity, V ~2~ = final volume

This relationship holds true due to the fact that the moles of solute
stays constant through a dilution process.

**Example 16.12**

50.0 mL of a 0.40 M NaCl solution is diluted to 1000.0 mL. What is the
concentration of NaCl in the new solution?

*Answer:*

Determine the values of each variable in the dilution equation above,
and then solve for the unknown variable.

V ~1~ = 50.0 mL, M ~1~ = 0.40 M, V ~2~ = 1000.0 mL, and M ~2~ = ?

Solving the above equation for M ~2~ gives us the following:

![\\text{M}\_2 &= \\mathrm{\\frac{M\_1V\_1}{V\_2}} \\\\\\&=
\\mathrm{\\frac{(50.0 \\ mL)(0.40 \\ M)}{(1000 \\ mL)}} = 0.020 \\
\\text{M}](ck12_math_images_dir/996b9b9075f1f8fe0cade24764834aa1.png)

## Lesson Summary {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-qvw}

-   The concentration of a solution can be expressed as the amount of
    solute present in a given amount of solvent or solution.
-   The most common way to express the concentration of a solution is
    molarity, which is equal to moles of solute per liter of solution.
-   Another way to express concentration is molality, which is equal to
    moles of solute per kilogram of solvent.
-   The ratio of solute mass to solution mass, when expressed as a
    percentage, is known as weight percent.
-   The ratio of solute particles to the total number of particles in a
    solution can be expressed in units of parts per million (ppm) or
    parts per billion (ppb).
-   Concentrated solutions can be diluted by adding pure solvent. The
    concentration and volume of the initial solution are related to the
    new concentration and new volume by the equation M ~1~ V ~1~ = M ~2~
    V ~2~ .

## Lesson Review Questions {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-mpd}

1.  You have 3.50 L of a solution that contains 90.0 g of sodium
    chloride (NaCl). What is the molarity of the solution?
2.  You have 0.8 L of a 0.5 M HCl solution. How many moles of HCl does
    this solution contain?
3.  We want to make 125 mL of a 0.154 M NaCl solution. How many grams of
    NaCl are needed?
4.  A stock bottle of concentrated hydrochloric acid is a 37% (w/w)
    HCl solution. What is the molarity of this solution? How many moles
    of HCl are in a 10 mL sample of this concentrated acid? The density
    of 37% HCl is 1.19 g/mL.
5.  To produce 40.0 g of silver chromate, you will need at least 23.4 g
    of potassium chromate in solution as a reactant. Available to you is
    5 L of a 6.0 M K ~2~ CrO ~4~ solution. What volume of the solution
    is required to give you the 23.4 g K ~2~ CrO ~4~ needed for the
    reaction?
6.  5.85 g of potassium iodide (KI) is dissolved in enough water to make
    0.125 L of solution. What is the molarity of this solution?
7.  How many moles of H ~2~ SO ~4~ are present in 0.500 L of a 0.150 M H
    ~2~ SO ~4~ solution?
8.  Calculate the molality of a solution in which 22.0 grams of KBr is
    dissolved in 250.0 mL of pure water.
9.  What is the molality when 0.75 mol of a substance is dissolved in
    2.50 L of water?
10. You have 1.00 L of water. How many grams of sucrose would need to be
    added in order to make a 1.0 molal solution?
11. Isopropyl alcohol is typically sold as a 70% (w/w) solution
    in water. What is the molarity of such a solution? Assume that the
    density of 70% (w/w) isopropyl alcohol is 0.786 g/mL.
12. If a solution contains Pb ^2+^ ions at a concentration of 15.0 ppm,
    what would the molarity of this solution be?
13. The presence of sodium fluoride in drinking water at the level of 2
    ppm may cause mottled enamel in teeth, skeletal fluorosis, and may
    be associated with cancer and other diseases. Calculate the molarity
    of a 2 ppm solution of sodium fluoride.
14. You want to make 500. mL of 0.050 M HCl by diluting a 6.0 M
    HCl solution. How much of the concentrated HCl solution is needed?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#16.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-hos}

-   Making solutions:
    [http://www.science-projects.com/solutions.htm](solutions.htm)

## Points to Consider {#16.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-ted}

-   How do you decide which method should be used to express the
    concentration of a given solution?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686142] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686143] -->

# Colligative Properties {#16.html#x-ck12-Q29sbGlnYXRpdmUgUHJvcGVydGllcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-67o}

-   Define and give examples of colligative properties.
-   Define vapor pressure and describe the conditions that affect it.
-   Calculate changes in vapor pressure using Raoult's law.
-   Define boiling point elevation and be able to calculate the boiling
    point elevation for a particular solution.
-   Define freezing point depression and be able to calculate the
    freezing point depression for a particular solution.
-   Determine the molar mass of a solute from boiling point elevation or
    freezing point depression data.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-0rw}

-   **vapor pressure** : A measure of the force exerted by a gas above a
    liquid in a sealed container.
-   **colligative property** : Solution properties which are dependent
    strictly on the amount of solute added and not the type of
    solute added.
-   **Raoult's law** : States that vapor pressure of a solution equals
    the product of the vapor pressure of the pure solvent and the mole
    fraction of solvent, as described by: P = x ~solvent~ P° .
-   **mole fraction** : The moles of a solution or mixture component
    divided by the total amount (in moles) of all components in the
    solution or mixture.
-   **boiling point elevation** : A property describing the increase in
    boiling point observed when a solute is added to a pure solvent.
-   **freezing point depression** : A property describing the decrease
    in freezing point observed when a solute is added to a pure solvent.

## Check Your Understanding {#16.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-rgz}

1.  Compare and contrast molarity and molality.
2.  How many moles of BaCl ~2~ are present in 250 mL of a 2.0 M BaCl ~2~
    solution?
3.  Calculate the molality of a solution in which 50.0 grams of sodium
    nitrate have been dissolved in 1.00 L of H ~2~ O.

## Introduction {#16.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-bfq}

When a solute is dissolved in a liquid solvent to form a homogeneous
solution, the behavior of the solution will often be different from that
of the pure solvent. For example, the boiling point, freezing point, and
vapor pressure of the solution will be different from that of the
original solvent. The freezing point of salt water is lower than the
freezing point of pure water, and the boiling point of a sucrose
solution is higher than that of pure water. In this lesson, we will look
at how to calculate the magnitude of these changes based on the
concentration of the solution.

## Vapor Pressure {#16.html#x-ck12-VmFwb3IgUHJlc3N1cmU._2-w6n}

As we saw when we studied *States of Matter* , the driving force for
particles in the liquid phase to escape into the gas phase depends on
both the temperature and identity of the substance. The vapor pressure
of a liquid is a measure of this ability. Specifically, **vapor
pressure** is the pressure exerted by a vapor that is in equilibrium
with its solid or liquid phase. For substances with a stronger drive to
enter the gas phase, more vapor particles will be present in the same
amount of space, resulting in a higher pressure. At a given temperature,
the vapor pressures of various liquids depends primarily on the strength
of intermolecular attractions between individual particles. **Figure**
[below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMTItVmFwb3ItUHJlc3N1cmUtQ3VydmU.)
shows the relative vapor pressures of several different substances.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-Y2NlMTgyODllZjFlMjZmOGE5MTViYmI0ZDRhZWY0MmE.-diz"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235323193898.png)

**Figure 16.11**

Vapor Pressure – Temperature Curve

</div>

Overall, molecules that can participate in hydrogen bonding, such as
acetic acid, tend to have lower vapor pressures at a given temperature
than similarly sized molecules without the ability to hydrogen bond,
such as acetone.

### Vapor Pressure of Solutions {#16.html#x-ck12-VmFwb3IgUHJlc3N1cmUgb2YgU29sdXRpb25z_2-8pb}

The vapor pressure of a solution is lower than that of the pure solvent
at the same temperature. This decrease in vapor pressure is one example
of a **colligative property** . Colligative properties are properties of
solutions that depend only on the concentration of dissolved particles
and not on their identity.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-ii0"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235323321320.png)

**Figure 16.12**

</div>

As we see in **Figure**
[above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMTMtQ29sbGlnYXRpdmUtUHJvcGVydGllcw..)
, the vapor pressure of the solution is lower than the vapor pressure of
the pure solvent. This phenomenon can be understood by considering the
equilibrium between the liquid and the gas phases for a given solvent.
When a pure solvent reaches equilibrium with its vapor, the liquid
particles are escaping into the gas phase at the same rate as the gas
particles are condensing into the liquid phase. If we add a non-volatile
solute (one that does not escape into the vapor phase under standard
conditions), the liquid becomes a mixture of solute and solvent
particles. The surface will then be composed of solute particles in
addition to solvent molecules, which slows the rate at which the liquid
particles can evaporate due to fewer solvent molecules in contact with
the liquid/vapor interface. However, it does not slow down the rate of
condensation. As a result, there is a net shift into the liquid phase.
Less solvent is present in its vapor form, so the resulting vapor
pressure is lower. This effect is illustrated on the molecular level in
**Figure** [below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMTQtU29sdXRlLUFkZGl0aW9u)
.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-OGVlMjkxMDdmYzZlY2Y4OWEyMzdhZTU3ZGEwZmM0NDE.-na9"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235323440412.png)

**Figure 16.13**

Vapor-Pressure Lowering in Solution

</div>

This effect is quantified by **Raoult’s law** , which states that the
vapor pressure of a solution is equal to the vapor pressure of the pure
solvent multiplied by its mole fraction. Raoult’s law can be expressed
mathematically as follows:

P = χ ~solvent~ P°

where P is the vapor pressure of the solution, χ ~solvent~ is the mole
fraction of the solvent, and P° is the vapor pressure of the pure
solvent.

### Mole Fraction {#16.html#x-ck12-TW9sZSBGcmFjdGlvbg.._2-zll}

The **mole fraction** (χ) of a component in a mixture is equal to the
number of particles of the specified component divided by the total
number of particles in the mixture. Alternatively, this ratio can be
expressed in moles.

![\\mathrm{\\chi \_A= \\frac{mol \\ A}{total \\
mol}}](ck12_math_images_dir/5b7b892bd218ac0e6f193dff43845cf2.png)

*or*

![\\mathrm{\\chi \_A=
\\frac{n\_A}{n\_{total}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/adf35fffbfa6f72dacd20827957f6d32.png)

Note that we are dealing with the total number of particles (or moles of
particles), so we need to take the dissociation of ionic substances into
account. If we dissolve one mole of NaCl in water, we would end up with
two moles of independent particles (one mole of sodium ions and one mole
of chloride ions). This information needs to be included in any mole
fraction calculations.

**Example 16.13**

22.6 grams of KCl is dissolved in 2000. grams of water. Determine the
mole fraction of KCl.

*Answer:*

![\\mathrm{\\chi \_A}&= \\mathrm{\\frac{n\_A}{n\_{total}}}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{n\_A} &= \\mathrm{22.6 \\ g \\ KCl \\times \\frac{1 \\
mol \\ KCl}{74.55 \\ g \\ KCl} \\times \\frac{2 \\ mol \\ ions}{1 \\ mol
\\ KCl} = 0.606 \\ mol \\ ions} \\\\\\\\mathrm{n\_{H\_2O}} &=
\\mathrm{2000. \\ g \\ H\_2O \\times \\frac{1 \\ mol \\ H\_2O}{18.02 \\
g\\ H\_2O} = 111.0 \\ mol \\ H\_2O} \\\\\\\\mathrm{n\_{total}} &=
\\mathrm{0.606 \\ mol + 111.0 \\ mol = 111.6 \\ mol}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\chi \_A} &= \\mathrm{\\frac{0.606 \\ mol}{111.6 \\ mol}
= 0.00543}](ck12_math_images_dir/ca819c8ba37c354cb7084bfe1c4ecb4f.png)

## Boiling Point Elevation {#16.html#x-ck12-Qm9pbGluZyBQb2ludCBFbGV2YXRpb24._2-95o}

Recall that boiling occurs when the vapor pressure of a liquid is equal
to the atmospheric pressure. Since adding a solute lowers the vapor
pressure, we would expect a higher temperature to be required before
boiling can begin. This phenomenon, known as **boiling point elevation**
, occurs whenever a solute is dissolved into a pure solvent.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-bhd"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235323559249.png)

**Figure 16.14**

</div>

The boiling point of a solution can be calculated using the following
expression:

<dl id="x-ck12-3yb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-roq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-k6q">
<dd>
![\\Delta T\_b=k\_b \\times m \\times
i](ck12_math_images_dir/3deb01f6be11d9d915e4587e9ed4650a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where Δ *T ~b~* is the increase in boiling point compared to the pure
solvent, *k ~b~* is the boiling point elevation constant for the given
solvent, *m* is the molality (not molarity) of the solution, and *i* is
the van't Hoff factor.

**Example 16.14**

Eugenol, the active ingredient in cloves, has the formula C ~10~ H ~12~
O ~2~ . Eugenol is a molecular substance that does not dissociate into
ions when dissolved in a solvent. What is the boiling point of a
solution in which 0.144 g of eugenol is dissolved in 10.0 g benzene? The
*k ~b~* value for benzene is 2.53 °C/ *m* , and the boiling point of
pure benzene is 80.1 °C.

*Answer:*

![\\Delta T\_b=k\_b \\times m \\times
i](ck12_math_images_dir/3deb01f6be11d9d915e4587e9ed4650a.png)

The van't Hoff factor ( *i* ) for a non dissociating substance is 1, and
the *k ~b~* value for benzene is given, so we only need to calculate the
molality of the solution. To do this, we need to determine the moles of
the solute and the mass of the solvent in kilograms.

![\\mathrm{moles\_{C\_{10}H\_{12}O\_2} = 0.144 \\ g \\
C\_{10}H\_{12}O\_2 \\times \\frac{1 \\ mol \\ C\_{10}H\_{12}O\_2}{164.22
\\ g \\ C\_{10}H\_{12}O\_2} = 8.77 \\times 10\^{-4} \\ mol \\
C\_{10}H\_{12}O\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/a9391b70cc694034e4fab4952877b07b.png)

![\\mathrm{mass \\ of \\ benzene = 10.0 \\ g \\ benzene \\times \\frac{1
\\ kg}{1000 \\ g} = 0.0100 \\ kg \\
benzene}](ck12_math_images_dir/1b779627db3a6628a3efef3e331147de.png)

![\\mathrm{molality = \\frac{8.77 \\times 10\^{-4} \\ mol \\
C\_{10}H\_{12}O\_2}{0.0100 \\ kg \\ benzene}} = 0.0877 \\
m](ck12_math_images_dir/274cfcc1e640c80af62725b8bb6efe7d.png)

![\\mathrm{\\Delta T\_b=2.53 \\ \^{\\circ} C/}m \\times 0.0877 \\ m
\\times 1 = 0.222 \\ \\mathrm{\^{\\circ}
C}](ck12_math_images_dir/667cfc46e4bb8668445e9cd3da348e27.png)

The boiling point is increased by 0.222 °C compared to the pure solvent.
Because the boiling point of pure benzene is 80.1 °C, the boiling point
of the solution would be 80.3 °C.

## Freezing Point Depression {#16.html#x-ck12-RnJlZXppbmcgUG9pbnQgRGVwcmVzc2lvbg.._2-psl}

The addition of solute to a pure solvent affects not only the boiling
point of the solution, but the freezing point as well. This phenomenon
is called **freezing point depression** , and it can be calculated in
essentially the same way as boiling point elevation:

<dl id="x-ck12-gjr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-j14">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jch">
<dd>
![\\Delta T\_f=k\_f \\times m \\times
i](ck12_math_images_dir/9c8bfeb45c21378b1b2dfbab9b3cb7a7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where Δ *T ~f~* is the decrease in freezing point compared to the pure
solvent, *k ~f~* is the freezing point depression constant for the given
solvent, *m* is the molality (not molarity) of the solution, and *i* is
the van't Hoff factor.

**Example 16.15**

Calculate the freezing point of a solution in which 5.00 g of biphenyl
(C ~12~ H ~10~ ) and 7.50 g of naphthalene (C ~10~ H ~8~ ) are dissolved
in 200.0 g of benzene. None of these substances dissociate into ions.
The normal freezing point of benzene is 5.5 °C, and its k ~f~ value is
5.12 °C/ *m* .

*Answer:*

![\\Delta T\_f=k\_f \\times m \\times
i](ck12_math_images_dir/9c8bfeb45c21378b1b2dfbab9b3cb7a7.png)

We are given k ~f~ , and *i* is 1 for nondissociating substances. To
determine the molality of the solution, we will need to know the total
moles of solute and the mass of the solvent in kilograms. Because
colligative properties like freezing point depression do not depend on
the identity of the solute, it does not matter that we have two
different types of solute molecules.

![\\mathrm{moles\_{C\_{12}H\_{10}} = 5.00 \\ g \\ C\_{12}H\_{10} \\times
\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ C\_{12}H\_{10}}{154.22 \\ g \\ C\_{12}H\_{10}} =
0.0324 \\ mol \\
C\_{12}H\_{10}}](ck12_math_images_dir/919cc5a13c0defb7f68346420488f99b.png)

![\\mathrm{moles\_{C\_{10}H\_8} = 7.50 \\ g \\ C\_{10}H\_8 \\times
\\frac{1 \\ mol \\ C\_{10}H\_8}{128.18 \\ g \\ C\_{10}H\_8} = 0.0585 \\
mol \\
C\_{10}H\_8}](ck12_math_images_dir/b4dd04aca714778704c3c5146ff71f8d.png)

![\\mathrm{mass \\ of \\ benzene = 200.0 \\ g \\ benzene \\times
\\frac{1 \\ kg}{1000 \\ g} = 0.2000 \\ kg \\
benzene}](ck12_math_images_dir/d0b6986da0eaea162b4605c17aac4a2b.png)

![\\mathrm{molality = \\frac{0.0324 \\ mol \\ C\_{12}H\_{10}+0.0585 \\
mol \\ C\_{10}H\_8}{0.2000 \\ kg \\ benzene}} = 0.455 \\
m](ck12_math_images_dir/ce43f7bc8863e4618bf3a960b524d064.png)

![\\mathrm{\\Delta T\_f=5.12 \\ \^{\\circ} C/}m \\times 0.455 \\ m
\\times 1 = 2.33 \\ \\mathrm{\^{\\circ}
C}](ck12_math_images_dir/796ca41d18ca0fe25cf547ae1899cb93.png)

The freezing point will be lowered by 2.33 °C. Subtracting this from the
normal freezing point of benzene (5.5 °C), this solution will freeze at
3.2 °C.

Values of k ~f~ and k ~b~ for some other common solvents are listed in
the **Table** [below](#16.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6VGFibGUtMTYuNA..) .

  Solvent       Normal Freezing Point (°C)   k ~f~ (°C/ *m* )   Normal Boiling Point (°C)   k ~b~ (°C/ *m* )
  ------------- ---------------------------- ------------------ --------------------------- ------------------
  Water         0                            1.86               100                         0.52
  Benzene       5.5                          5.12               80.1                        2.53
  Ethanol       -117.3                       1.99               78.4                        1.22
  Acetic Acid   16.6                         3.90               117.9                       2.93
  Cyclohexane   6.6                          20.0               80.7                        2.79

  :  Molal Boiling-Point Elevation and Freezing-Point Depression
  Constants of Several Common Liquids

Notice that k ~f~ is generally larger than k ~b~ for a given substance.

## Lesson Summary {#16.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-l0f}

-   The degree to which particles of a given liquid tend to escape into
    the gas phase is measured by the liquid’s vapor pressure. The vapor
    pressure of a solution is a colligative property, which means that
    it is affected only by the concentration of solute particles and not
    their identity.
-   The vapor pressure of a solution is lower than the vapor pressure of
    the pure solvent (P &lt; P°).
-   Raoult’s Law states that the vapor pressure of a solution is equal
    to the product of the vapor pressure of the pure solvent and the
    mole fraction of the solvent (P = χ ~solvent~ P°).
-   The mole fraction of a component in a mixture (χ) can be calculated
    by dividing the number of particles (or moles) of the component by
    the total number of particles (or moles) in the complete mixture.
-   Adding a solute increases the boiling point of a pure solvent. This
    change can be calculated using the equation ![\\Delta T\_b=k\_b
    \\times m \\times
    i](ck12_math_images_dir/3deb01f6be11d9d915e4587e9ed4650a.png) .
-   Similarly, adding a solute decreases the freezing point of a
    pure solvent. This change can be calculated using the equation
    ![\\Delta T\_f=k\_f \\times m \\times
    i](ck12_math_images_dir/9c8bfeb45c21378b1b2dfbab9b3cb7a7.png) .

## Review Problems {#16.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3IFByb2JsZW1z_2-qwv}

1.  Would you expect water or ethanol (C ~2~ H ~5~ OH) to have a higher
    vapor pressure at a given temperature?
2.  Based on **Figure**
    [above](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMTItVmFwb3ItUHJlc3N1cmUtQ3VydmU.)
    , which substance do you suppose has the strongest intermolecular
    attractions? Which has the weakest intermolecular attractions? Which
    substance would evaporate most quickly?
3.  What would be the vapor pressure of a 1.0 molal NaCl solution?
4.  Calculate the boiling point and freezing point of a 1.0 molal
    NaCl solution.
5.  Calculate the boiling point and freezing point of a 1.0 molal
    aluminum chloride solution. Compare these values to the boiling and
    freezing points determined for the 1.0 molal NaCl solution in the
    previous question. Explain any differences.
6.  We want to prepare a solution in which the mole fraction of NaCl
    is 0.20. If the solution contains 80 grams of NaCl, how many grams
    of water are required?
7.  Calculate the mole fractions of both the solute and the solvent in a
    saturated solution of hydrogen sulfide in water at 20°C and 1 atm.
    Use the temperature-solubility curve in the **Figure**
    [below](#16.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMTYtMTYtVGVtcGVyYXR1cmUtU29sdWJpbGl0eQ..)
    to determine the solubility of H ~2~ S.

<div
id="16.html#x-ck12-YTE4YzFkMDE1OWUyODc1ZDgxYmQwZjRiNDljOGNjN2Q.-fbm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_16_files/20151009235323690279.png)

**Figure 16.15**

Solubility-temperature relationship for H ~2~ S

</div>

8.  How many grams of ethylene glycol (HOCH ~2~ CH ~2~ OH) must be added
    to 5.50 kg of water to lower the freezing point of the water from
    0.0°C to -10.0°C? (This is approximately what happens when you put
    antifreeze in your car.)
9.  Vitamin K is involved in the mechanism by which blood clots. When
    5.00 g of vitamin K is dissolved in 100.0 g of camphor, the freezing
    point is lowered by 4.43°C. Calculate the molar mass of vitamin K. K
    ~f~ for camphor is 37.7°C/ *m* , and vitamin K is a molecular
    substance that does not dissociate into ions.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#16.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-2tz}

-   Freezing-point depression animation:
    [http://group.chem.iastate.edu/Greenbowe/sections/projectfolder/animationsindex.htm](animationsindex.htm)
-   Boiling-point elevation animation:
    [http://group.chem.iastate.edu/Greenbowe/sections/projectfolder/animationsindex.htm](animationsindex.htm)

## Points to Consider {#16.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-7ru}

-   In colder climates, magnesium fluoride is often sprayed on the roads
    during the winter to reduce icing. What colligative property is
    being utilized here?
-   Would 1 mole of NaCl or 1 mole of MgF ~2~ have a larger effect on
    the colligative properties of a given solvent?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686143] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#16.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-oy1}

1.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
2.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
3.  User:Jü/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methanol\_Hydrogen\_Bridge\_V.2.svg](File:Methanol_Hydrogen_Bridge_V.2.svg) .
    Public Domain
4.  User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Toluol.svg](File:Toluol.svg) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Bangin/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Octane.svg](File:Octane.svg) .
    Public Domain
6.  User:Taxman/De.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Na%2BH2O.svg](File:Na%2BH2O.svg) .
    Public Domain
7.  Jodi So and Steven Lai. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
8.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
9.  User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harnstoff.svg](File:Harnstoff.svg) .
    Public Domain
10. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
11. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
12. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
13. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
14. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
15. Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="17.html"></span>

# Thermochemistry {#17.html#x-ck12-VGhlcm1vY2hlbWlzdHJ5-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_17_files/20151009235332685578.jpeg)
</span>

Energy is an integral component of chemical reactions. Some reactions
require an input of energy, whereas others release energy as they
proceed. When we burn propane, we are oxidizing small hydrocarbons by
reacting them with oxygen. This reaction produces heat, which can be
used to heat a barbeque for cooking or fill a balloon with hot air so it
can soar over the countryside. In this chapter, we will focus primarily
on the transfer of heat and energetic changes that occur during chemical
reactions.

^Adrian\\ Pingstone.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flame.inflates.balloon.bath.arp.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686145] -->

# Heat Flow {#17.html#x-ck12-SGVhdCBGbG93}

## Lesson Objectives {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-qcp}

-   Define thermochemistry.
-   Define and give examples of exothermic reactions.
-   Define and give examples of endothermic reactions.
-   Draw a diagram of a constant-pressure calorimeter.
-   Define and perform calculations related to specific heat and
    heat capacity.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-1hf}

-   **thermochemistry** : The study of energy relationships in
    chemical reactions.
-   **thermodynamics** : The study of how heat, work, and various forms
    of energy are related to one another.
-   **system** : The chemical reaction being observed, generally within
    a container.
-   **surroundings** : Include everything that is not part of
    the system.
-   **open system** : A system in which both matter and heat can be
    freely exchanged between the reaction container (the system) and
    the surroundings.
-   **closed system** : A system in which matter cannot enter or leave,
    but heat can flow between the system and surroundings.
-   **isolated system** : An idealized system in which neither matter
    nor heat can be exchanged between system and surroundings.
-   **heat** : A form of thermal energy transferred between two bodies
    (such as a system and its surroundings) that are at
    different temperatures.
-   **exothermic** : A process in which heat is released to
    the surroundings.
-   **endothermic** : A process in which heat is absorbed from
    the surroundings.
-   **calorimetry** : The measurement of heat transfers, usually through
    monitoring changes in the temperature of an isolated system.
-   **calorimeter** : A device used to measure temperature changes
    during chemical processes.
-   **specific heat** : The amount of energy needed to raise the
    temperature of one gram of a substance by 1°C.
-   **heat capacity** : The amount of heat need to raise the temperature
    of a specified amount (usually mass) of a material by 1°C.

## Check Your Understanding {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-nqa}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#17.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ..-j2s}

-   What are the basic types of chemical reactions?
-   What is energy?
-   What is the law of conservation of energy?

## Introduction {#17.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-epb}

Just as the burning of wood releases energy in the form of heat, many
other chemical reactions also release heat. There are also chemical
reactions, such as photosynthesis in plants, which absorb energy in the
form of heat. The study of energy changes in chemical reactions is
called **thermochemistry** . The broader term **thermodynamics** also
looks at how heat, work, and various forms of energy are related to one
another. In this lesson, we will study the difference between reactions
that absorb versus release heat as well as how to measure this change in
energy.

## Chemical Energy and Heat {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgRW5lcmd5IGFuZCBIZWF0-qpo}

There are two basic types of energy in the universe: potential energy
and kinetic energy. Potential energy is stored energy that is available
to do work, but it has not yet been released. The wood in a fireplace
possesses potential energy. It is available for producing heat, but has
not yet been ignited, so it is not releasing heat into the surrounding
environment. Kinetic energy is the energy of motion. A waterfall is an
example of kinetic energy. The moving water can erode the rocks in the
stream, wearing them down into smaller particles. This same water motion
can turn a turbine to generate electricity. In both cases, the movement
of the material (water) causes work to be done.

Chemical energy, the energy stored in molecules and atoms, is one type
of potential energy. Certain reactions can cause this energy to be
released as heat. Other reactions require an input of energy, in which
case the products will store more potential energy than the reactants.
When we studied phase changes, we saw a relationship between energy and
the state of matter. To melt a solid or boil a liquid, energy needs to
be added in order to break up the intermolecular forces holding
particles together in more ordered states. The reverse processes,
condensation and freezing, release energy, because more favorable
intermolecular interactions are formed.

When we consider a chemical reaction, we need to take into account both
the system and the surroundings. The **system** includes the components
involved in the chemical reaction itself. These will often take place in
a flask, a beaker, a test tube, or some other container. The
**surroundings** include everything that is not part of the system. When
potassium reacts with water, part of the heat energy generated in the
reaction is released into the surroundings. The boundary between system
and surroundings is arbitrary, and it is generally chosen in a way that
makes observations and calculations easier.

Depending on the specific setup, a few different types of systems can be
described. In an **open system** , both matter and heat can be freely
exchanged between the reaction container (the system) and the
surroundings. An example would be an open beaker, where any gaseous
materials or vaporized molecules are free to leave the system and float
off into the atmosphere. In a **closed system** , matter cannot enter or
leave, but heat can flow between the system and surroundings. A
stoppered reaction flask would be an example of a closed system.
Finally, a situation in which neither matter nor heat can be exchanged
between system and surroundings is referred to as an **isolated system**
. Although truly isolated systems are not really possible, a sealed,
vacuum-insulated reaction flask would come very close.

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-MDRkM2JmNGQyOGIzOTBjYWNlNWU0OWEwYmY3Y2NmNzA.-kdo"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Department of Energy, User:Helix84/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:First_law_open_system.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235332817033.png)

**Figure 17.1**

Open system

</div>

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-ZjEwMjZlYmIwZGFiMmQwMmZhMThhYjA4ODJkMGY5NzE.-dpf"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235332996860.jpeg)

**Figure 17.2**

Closed system. Heat can be exchanged between the system and the
surrounding environment, but matter cannot move from one part of the
system to another.

</div>

### Exothermic and Endothermic Processes {#17.html#x-ck12-RXhvdGhlcm1pYyBhbmQgRW5kb3RoZXJtaWMgUHJvY2Vzc2Vz-o4b}

**Heat** involves the transfer of thermal energy between two bodies that
are at different temperatures. If you held a flask containing a reaction
that releases energy, you would be able to feel the heat being
transferred from the reaction into your hand. A process in which heat is
released is referred to as **exothermic** . Conversely, reactions that
absorb energy will remove energy from the surroundings, causing the
container to feel cold. For example, dissolving ammonium nitrate in
water will significantly lower the water temperature. Processes that
absorb energy from their surroundings are called **endothermic** .

For example, the reaction between potassium and water is very
exothermic:

![2 \\text{K}+2 \\text{H}\_2\\text{O}\\rightarrow 2
\\text{KOH}+\\text{H}\_2+\\text{heat}](ck12_math_images_dir/39bb0fd5e70001a7386190b941888a96.png)

Another exothermic reaction involves combining elemental sodium with
chlorine:

![2 \\text{Na} + \\text{Cl}\_2 \\rightarrow
2\\text{NaCl}+\\text{heat}](ck12_math_images_dir/5e13ffc75612ee355716d959b31953ae.png)

Endothermic reactions are also quite common. An example would be the
splitting of water by electrolysis:

![2 \\text{H}\_2\\text{O}+ \\text{heat} \\rightarrow
2\\text{H}\_2+\\text{O}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/8745d618c49cce145e443b40b16a0aab.png)

We will explore the details of the energy changes that take place during
exothermic and endothermic reactions later in this chapter.

## Calorimetry {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2Fsb3JpbWV0cnk.-heb}

The subfield of thermochemistry studies the energy changes that occur
over the course of various chemical reactions. We will first look at how
these changes are measured and then go into quantitative descriptions of
heat transfer. **Calorimetry** is a term used to describe the
measurement of heat transfers, usually by monitoring changes in the
temperature of an isolated system. A **calorimeter** is a device used to
measure temperature changes during chemical processes. The simplest type
of calorimeter is the constant-pressure device illustrated in **Figure**
[below](#17.html#x-ck12-cHJlc3N1cmVfZGV2aWNl) .

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-OTg5MjI0NzQ2MGZkZmIxOGRkZWIwNGFhNzdmZmVkZjM.-glk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Li-on/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Calorimeter.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235333105646.png)

**Figure 17.3**

</div>

A basic calorimeter includes the following components:

1.  a thermometer to measure temperature changes.
2.  a stirring rod to mix materials thoroughly
3.  an insulated lid
4.  an inner container
5.  an outer container
6.  spacers to separate the inner and outer containers

To use a calorimeter, the components of a reaction are placed in the
inner container and mixed. As the reaction proceeds, the temperature
change can be measured with the thermometer. The space between the inner
and outer containers provides insulation to minimize heat loss.

### Units of Heat {#17.html#x-ck12-VW5pdHMgb2YgSGVhdA..-nq9}

The SI unit for heat, and for any form of energy, is the joule.
Officially, one joule is the amount of energy needed to move an object
by one meter while exerting a force of one newton. Although this
definition is based on the concept of work, we can also talk about the
amount of heat (in joules) required to change the temperature of a given
material by a specific amount.

A related unit is the calorie. This term arose prior to the
establishment of the SI system and is now replaced by the joule in most
situations. One calorie is defined as the amount of energy needed to
increase the temperature of one gram of water by 1°C. One calorie equals
4.184 joules. Note that this calorie is not exactly the same as the
calories listed on food products. One food Calorie (usually written with
a capital C) is equal to 1000 “regular” calories. Thus, a 140-Calorie
snack can be fully digested to produce 140,000 calories of energy. We
will use the SI unit joules in our discussions of heat energy.

### Heat Capacity and Specific Heat {#17.html#x-ck12-SGVhdCBDYXBhY2l0eSBhbmQgU3BlY2lmaWMgSGVhdA..-hh7}

We mentioned earlier that 4.184 joules (1 calorie) is the amount of
energy needed to raise the temperature of one gram of liquid water by
1°C. This value is known as the **specific heat** of liquid water, and
it has units of J/g•°C. Other materials have different specific heat
values. The **Table**
[below](#17.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6c3BlY2lmaWNfaGVhdHM.) lists the specific
heats of several substances:

  Material         Specific Heat (J/g•°C)
  ---------------- ------------------------
  aluminum         0.900
  gold             0.129
  graphite         0.720
  diamond          0.502
  copper           0.385
  iron             0.139
  water (liquid)   4.184

Note that the heat capacity of a substance depends on its state of
matter. Except for water, all of the values in the **Table**
[above](#17.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6c3BlY2lmaWNfaGVhdHM.) refer to the
specific heat for the solid form of that substance. Also note that water
has an unusually high heat capacity. Much more heat is needed to raise
the temperature of water by a given amount than to cause the same
temperature increase in an equal mass of graphite, diamonds, or various
metals.

A related term is **heat capacity** , which is defined as the amount of
heat need to raise the temperature of a specified amount of material by
1°C. Heat capacity can be calculated using the following formula:

![\\text{Heat
capacity}=mc](ck12_math_images_dir/52e628a867a63ee3fc43fb9001b415b6.png)

where *m* is the mass of the material and *c* is the specific heat of
the material. Heat capacity has units of J/°C.

We can calculate the amount of heat required to cause a specific
temperature change by using the following equation:

![q = m \\times c \\times \\Delta
T](ck12_math_images_dir/1a84dc9324260666d4fb4074e4e4ed37.png)

where q is the amount of heat added to the system, m is the mass of the
substance, c is the specific heat of the substance, and ΔT is the change
in temperature.

**Example 17.1**

How much heat is required to increase the temperature of a 150-gram
block of aluminum by 42°C?

*Answer:*

![q &= m \\times c \\times \\Delta T \\\\\\q &= 150 \\ \\text{g} \\times
0.900 \\ \\text{J/g} \\cdot\^{\\circ}\\text{C} \\times
42\^{\\circ}\\text{C} \\\\\\q &= 5670 \\
\\text{J}](ck12_math_images_dir/b61576d26b2a369638cfd455869ee58d.png)

## Lesson Summary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-2hk}

-   Chemical reactions essentially always involve a transfer of
    heat energy.
-   Exothermic reactions release heat into their surroundings.
-   Endothermic reactions absorb heat from their surroundings.
-   Specific heat and heat capacity measure the amount of heat energy
    needed to change the temperature of a material by a given amount.

## Lesson Review Questions {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-5qs}

1.  What is true of all chemical processes?
2.  How can you distinguish a system and its surroundings?
3.  What are the required characteristics of an isolated system?
4.  Explain the difference between exothermic and endothermic processes.
5.  Indicate which of the following processes are exothermic and which
    are endothermic:
    1.  ice melting
    2.  burning a candle
    3.  cooking an egg
    4.  the evaporation of sweat

6.  Calculate the amount of heat needed to increase the temperature of
    125 g of water from 22°C to 59°C.
7.  Calculate the specific heat of copper, given that 204.75 J of energy
    raises the temperature of 15 g of copper from 35°C to 70°C.
8.  432 J of energy is required to raise the temperature of a block of
    aluminum from 20°C to 60°C. Calculate the mass of aluminum present.
9.  300 g of liquid ethanol at 22°C is supplied with 6480 J of heat.
    What is the final temperature of the ethanol? (The specific heat of
    ethanol is 2.44 J/g∙°C).

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#17.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-ncs}

-   Exothermic and endothermic reactions:
    [http://www.docbrown.info/page03/3\_51energy.htm](3_51energy.htm)
-   Interactive practice with specific heat:
    [http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/thermo/spht.html](spht.html)
-   Heat, work, and energy:
    [http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/heat-work-energy-d\_292.html](heat-work-energy-d_292.html)

## Points to Consider {#17.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-xjk}

-   How can we determine if a specific reaction is exothermic or
    endothermic?
-   How is enthalpy related to heat?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686145] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686146] -->

# Enthalpy {#17.html#x-ck12-RW50aGFscHk.}

## Lesson Objectives {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-sxk}

-   State the first law of thermodynamics.
-   Define enthalpy.
-   Explain how enthalpy changes relate to exothermic and
    endothermic reactions.
-   Perform calculations using enthalpy values for various reactions.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-m4z}

-   **first law of thermodynamics** : States that energy can be
    converted from one form to another, but cannot be created
    or destroyed.
-   **enthalpy** : A thermodynamic function of a system that is the
    internal heat content of a substance or system that is at a
    constant pressure.
-   **enthalpy of reaction** : The change in enthalpy resulting from a
    mole of matter altered by a chemical reaction under
    standard conditions.
-   **standard enthalpy of formation** : The enthalpy change that would
    be necessary to form a compound from its elements in their standard
    states at 25°C; has a value of zero for any element in its most
    stable form.

## Check Your Understanding {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-3cl}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#17.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._1-slu}

-   What are endothermic and exothermic reactions?
-   How is heat transfer measured?

## Introduction {#17.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-g9r}

One of the most fundamental scientific laws is that the total amount of
energy in the universe is constant. The **first law of thermodynamics**
says that energy can be converted from one form to another, but it
cannot be created or destroyed. This law is very difficult to prove,
since we cannot measure the energy of the entire universe. However, we
can measure energy changes as various physical and chemical processes
occur, and this allows us to show that the total amount of energy in an
isolated system remains constant. Our discussion in this lesson will
focus on differences in energy between one state and another.

## Enthalpy {#17.html#x-ck12-RW50aGFscHk._1-tr5}

In the previous lesson, we looked at how heat transfers are measured. In
practice, only changes in energy and heat can be measured; we cannot
measure the "energy" of a substance or system by itself. For practical
reasons, most reactions are run at a constant pressure, with the
reaction vessel open to the external atmosphere. **Enthalpy** is an
energetic concept that can be thought of as the internal heat content of
a substance or system that is at a constant pressure. Technically, it is
defined as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-zvm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-oqz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-umd">
<dd>
![H = E + PV](ck12_math_images_dir/8ac4de81946a6b0c80afcb93676f05bd.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where H is the enthalpy of the system, E is the internal energy, P is
the pressure, and V is the volume. It can be difficult to distinguish
"heat" and "enthalpy." Heat measures the transfer of thermal energy
between two objects, and enthalpy measures the flow of heat. When heat
flows out of a system, the change in enthalpy is negative; when heat
flows into a system, the change in enthalpy is positive. Enthalpy is a
useful tool for characterizing chemical reactions.

### Enthalpy of Reaction {#17.html#x-ck12-RW50aGFscHkgb2YgUmVhY3Rpb24._1-hce}

Any chemical reaction can be written in the form reactants → products.
Although the enthalpy of an isolated component cannot be directly
measured, the enthalpy change over the course of a chemical reaction can
be measured. We can define the **enthalpy of reaction** as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-oml">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ajl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-h4o">
<dd>
![\\Delta
H\_{reaction}=H\_{products}-H\_{reactants}](ck12_math_images_dir/ba2f4484c75a892e2c476ec118e0a0cd.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The enthalpy of reaction allows us to determine if a given reaction is
exothermic or endothermic. An exothermic reaction, in which heat is
released by the reaction to the surroundings, has a negative ΔH value.

A plot of enthalpy vs. reaction progress would take the following form
for an exothermic reaction:

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-ZDYxZDFlN2ZjZDlmNTVjNjhjZmMwYWRmNjIzNGRhNDI.-vtw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235333236688.png)

**Figure 17.4**

Energy profile of an exothermic reaction.

</div>

The enthalpy of the reactants is greater than the enthalpy of the
products. During the course of the reaction, heat is released to the
surroundings.

If a net input of heat is required for the reaction to proceed, then ΔH
is positive, and the reaction is endothermic. In an endothermic
reaction, the reactants are lower in enthalpy than the products, which
is why heat must be added to the system in order for the reaction to
proceed. An enthalpy vs. reaction progress plot for an endothermic
reaction would have the following form:

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-MjQxNTFkYzg2MjdlMmI0MmQyOTBlNzE4YjQ3ZTNhYmU.-p3q"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235333345005.png)

**Figure 17.5**

Energy profile of an endothermic reaction.

</div>

### Standard Enthalpy of Formation {#17.html#x-ck12-U3RhbmRhcmQgRW50aGFscHkgb2YgRm9ybWF0aW9u_1-od0}

Although we cannot directly measure the enthalpy content of a single
substance, we can determine the enthalpy change that would be necessary
to form a compound from its elements in their standard states at 25°C.
This value is referred to as the **standard enthalpy of formation** (ΔH
~f~ ). The term standard heat of formation can be used interchangeably;
although, heat and enthalpy are technically not the same quantity. These
values are tabulated for a large number of substances, and knowledge of
the ΔH ~f~ values for each component in a reaction allows you to predict
the total enthalpy change for that reaction, as we will see in the
following section.

The standard states for most elements can be determined just by finding
out what state of matter they are in at 25°C, such as Ag(s), Hg(l), or
Xe(g). However, some nonmetals have more complicated standard states. In
particular, seven elements exist as diatomic substances in their
standard states. H ~2~ (g), N ~2~ (g), O ~2~ (g), F ~2~ (g), Cl ~2~ (g),
Br ~2~ (l), and I ~2~ (s) each represent the standard forms of these
elements.

Because standard enthalpy of formation values represent the change from
elements in their standard state to a final substance, any element that
is already in its standard state has a ΔH ~f~ value of 0.

## Calculations Using Thermochemical Equations {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpb25zIFVzaW5nIFRoZXJtb2NoZW1pY2FsIEVxdWF0aW9ucw.._1-iap}

The total enthalpy change for a reaction can be predicted using the
following equation:

![\\Delta H\_{rxn} = \\Sigma n \\Delta H\_f(products)- \\Sigma n \\Delta
H\_f(reactants)](ck12_math_images_dir/e2e94da70ba2958f12fe5926f7bb557e.png)

Essentially, if we add together the standard enthalpy of formation
values for each product (multiplied by its coefficient in the balanced
equation) and then subtract the ΔH ~f~ for each reactant (again,
multiplied by their coefficients), we are left with ΔH for the overall
reaction.

When performing enthalpy calculations, a few points need to be
remembered:

-   ΔH ~f~ values are generally given in kJ/mol, so we need to multiply
    each value by the total number of moles of each component in
    the reaction.
-   The standard enthalpy of formation for any element in its most
    stable form at 25°C is zero.
-   The state of the compound must be noted so the correct enthalpy
    value can be used. For example, ΔH ~f~ is -285.8 kJ/mol for liquid
    water and -241.8 kJ/mol for water vapor.
-   Keep close track of the signs of each value, since many ΔH ~f~
    values are negative.

The easiest way to explain this process is through an example problem.
Let’s consider the energy changes that occur during the combustion of
methane gas:

**Example 17.2**

Calculate the enthalpy of reaction for the following process:

![\\text{CH}\_4(g)+2\\text{O}\_2(g) \\rightarrow
\\text{CO}\_2(g)+2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)](ck12_math_images_dir/1d595b5660d74eee6a6455f609c30086.png)

You will need to make use of the following data:

-   ΔH ~f~ for CH ~4~ (g) = -74.87 kJ/mol
-   ΔH ~f~ for CO ~2~ (g) = -393.5 kJ/mol
-   ΔH ~f~ for H ~2~ O(l) = -285.8 kJ/mol

*Answer:*

We are given ΔH ~f~ values for every reaction component except for O ~2~
(g). Because O ~2~ (g) is the standard form of elemental oxygen, it has
a ΔH ~f~ value of zero. Now use the following equation:

![\\Delta H\_{rxn} &= \\Sigma n \\Delta H\_f(products)- \\Sigma n
\\Delta H\_f(reactants) \\\\\\&=( -393.5 \\ \\text{kJ/mol}+2(-285.8 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}))-(-74.87 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} + 0 \\ \\text{kJ/mol})
\\\\\\&= -965.1\\ \\text{kJ/mol} - (-74.87\\ \\text{kJ/mol})
\\\\\\&=-965.1\\ \\text{kJ/mol}+74.87\\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\&=-890.3 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/affaa9ba10452f9c823249586f8894fe.png)

The enthalpy change that takes course during this reaction is highly
negative, indicating a strongly exothermic reaction. This is consistent
with what we know about the combustion of methane, the primary component
in natural gas.

## Lesson Summary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-kje}

-   The first law of thermodynamics tells us that energy can be
    converted from one form to another but cannot be created
    or destroyed.
-   When discussing energy changes for reactions that are run at a
    constant pressure, it is generally simpler to measure and tabulate
    changes in enthalpy (H), which can be thought of as the heat content
    of a system at constant pressure.
-   The standard enthalpy of formation (ΔH ~f~ ) for a substance is the
    enthalpy change that would be necessary to form that substance from
    its elements in their standard states at 25°C.
-   The enthalpy of a reaction can be calculated from ΔH ~f~ values for
    its various components using the following equation: ![\\Delta
    H\_{reaction} = \\Sigma n \\Delta H\_{products}- \\Sigma n \\Delta
    H\_{reactants}](ck12_math_images_dir/12965fa7605215a46956f832162967ab.png) .

## Lesson Review Questions {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-n7z}

### Reviewing Concepts {#17.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz_1-t6h}

1.  Which of the following situations would violate of the first law of
    thermodynamics? Explain your answer in each case.
    1.  Car brakes heat up when you slow down at a stop sign.
    2.  In a warm room, a glass of water spontaneously freezes.
    3.  A car parked on a hill rolls upward when the brake is released.
    4.  As sun shines on a swimming pool, more water evaporates.

2.  How does enthalpy help us determine whether a reaction is exothermic
    or endothermic?

### Problems {#17.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM._1-hxa}

1.  Use standard enthalpies of formation from the supplemental link
    below to calculate ΔH ~rxn~ for the reaction: 2CO(g) + O ~2~ (g) →
    2CO ~2~ (g).
2.  Use standard enthalpies of formation from the supplemental link
    below to calculate ΔH ~rxn~ for the reaction: 4NH ~3~ (g) + 5O
    ~2~ (g) → 6H ~2~ O(g) + 4NO(g).
3.  Complete combustion of 1.00 mol of acetone (C ~3~ H ~6~ O) liberates
    1790 kJ of heat: C ~3~ H ~6~ O(l) + 4 O ~2~ (g) → 3 CO ~2~ (g) + 3 H
    ~2~ O(l); ΔH = -1790 kJ. Using this information and ΔH ~f~ data for
    CO ~2~ and H ~2~ O, calculate the standard enthalpy of formation
    for acetone.
4.  Determine ΔH ~f~ for IF, given the following information:

<dl id="x-ck12-OGNiZTkxMTgxZDJmMjViYWQ5Y2MzZjYzZjY2M2M0ZmE.-oze">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTY5YTgxNWFiNDEwM2RkNTYwYzlmN2I0NDJmMTFjMjQ.-ch4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTY5YTgxNWFiNDEwM2RkNTYwYzlmN2I0NDJmMTFjMjQ.-xde">
<dd>
IF ~7~ + I ~2~ (s) → IF ~5~ + 2IF; ΔH ~f~ = -89 kJ

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTg1NGEyYjBiOTFjNGRlMmRlZjYxZTI5ZDkxNzdmMzg.-wuh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTg1NGEyYjBiOTFjNGRlMmRlZjYxZTI5ZDkxNzdmMzg.-s7l">
<dd>
ΔH ~f~ for IF ~7~ = -941 kJ

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YzBmZjM2MGYyM2M4OWMyODFkNzEyYzU4YmRlYmI4OTI.-7uf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YzBmZjM2MGYyM2M4OWMyODFkNzEyYzU4YmRlYmI4OTI.-zew">
<dd>
ΔH ~f~ for IF ~5~ = -840 kJ

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
5.  Write the balanced equation for the complete combustion of C ~2~ H
    ~6~ , and calculate the heat of combustion per mole of <span
    class="x-ck12-underline"> gaseous </span> water formed using
    standard enthalpies of formation.

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#17.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-ngn}

-   Standard enthalpy of formation values:
    [http://chemistry.about.com/od/thermodynamics/a/Heats-Of-Formation.htm](Heats-Of-Formation.htm)
-   Video: calculating the heat of reaction:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iQuy2mgbV9o](watch?v=iQuy2mgbV9o)

## Points to Consider {#17.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-9t0}

-   How does the state of a material affect enthalpy changes?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686146] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686147] -->

# Enthalpy and Phase Transitions {#17.html#x-ck12-RW50aGFscHkgYW5kIFBoYXNlIFRyYW5zaXRpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-zsn}

-   Explain why enthalpy increases or decreases during a given
    transition from one physical state to another.
-   Calculate enthalpy changes that occur during changes of state.
-   Calculate enthalpy changes that occur when materials are dissolved
    in water.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-su4}

-   **molar heat of fusion** : The heat absorbed by one mole of a
    substance as it is converted from a solid to a liquid.
-   **molar heat of vaporization** : The heat absorbed by one mole of a
    substance as it is converted from a liquid to a gas.
-   **heat of solution** : Indicates how much energy is absorbed or
    released when one mole of a substance is fully dissolved in a
    specific solvent.

## Check Your Understanding {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-lvf}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#17.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._2-gvu}

-   What phase transitions can a substance undergo?
-   What are the energy requirements for achieving a change of state?

## Introduction {#17.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-qix}

When your ice cream melts on a hot day, there is a change in internal
energy as well as a change in enthalpy occurring. An enthalpy change
also occurs when the moisture in the air condenses onto the cold
windshield of a car. These changes of state can be described by the
changes in enthalpy that accompany them. In this lesson, you will learn
how to calculate and quantify changes of energy as related to changes of
state.

## Summary of Phase Transition Processes {#17.html#x-ck12-U3VtbWFyeSBvZiBQaGFzZSBUcmFuc2l0aW9uIFByb2Nlc3Nlcw.._2-t2j}

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-NDA0NTExMDZkNmMxZjNmNWFkMzE2MDc0OWE5NzVmMGE.-iri"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235333471924.png)

**Figure 17.6**

Phase transitions

</div>

**Figure** [above](#17.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW0tMTctMi1waGFzZXRyYW5zaXRpb24.)
summarizes the basic transitions that a substance may undergo as a
result of changes in temperature or pressure. For any phase change,
energy will be either released (for exothermic processes) or absorbed
from the surroundings (for endothermic processes). Processes in which
intermolecular interactions are weakened or broken (melting,
vaporization, and sublimation) require an input of energy; they are
endothermic. Processes in which attractive interactions are formed
(freezing, condensation, and deposition) release energy, so they are
exothermic.

The amount of energy necessary to melt one mole of a substance is known
as the **molar heat of fusion** . Similarly, the amount of energy
necessary to vaporize one mole of a substance is referred to as the
**molar heat of vaporization** . The values of these parameters are
given for water in the following table, along with the specific heats
exhibited by water in its solid, liquid, and gaseous forms.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Parameter                Phase Transition         Enthalpy Value
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
  molar heat of fusion     solid → liquid           +6.0 kJ/mol
  (melting)                                         

  molar heat of            liquid → gas             +40.7 kJ/mol
  vaporization                                      

  specific heat of ice                              2.09 J/g•°C

  specific heat of water                            4.18 J/g•°C

  specific heat of steam                            1.84 J/g•°C
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notice that the process of freezing is the exact reverse of the process
of melting, so the enthalpy change has the same magnitude but opposite
sign. The same is true for the relationship between condensation and
vaporization. Also note that the specific heat of water is dependent on
the state of the material. Ice, liquid water, and steam all have
different specific heat values. Remember that specific heat refers to
the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one gram of
liquid water by 1°C.

## Energy and Changes of State {#17.html#x-ck12-RW5lcmd5IGFuZCBDaGFuZ2VzIG9mIFN0YXRl_2-1m0}

We have already learned how to use specific heat to calculate the energy
needed to change a material from one temperature to another within a
given state. Now let’s look at the energy changes required for changes
of state.

**Example 17.3**

How much energy is needed to convert 180 grams of ice at 0°C to liquid
water at the same temperature?

*Answer:*

The heat of fusion for water is 6.0 kJ/mol. First, we need to convert
the mass of water to moles:

![180 \\ \\text{g H}\_2\\text{O} \\times \\frac{1 \\ \\text{mol
H}\_2\\text{O}}{18.02 \\ \\text{g H}\_2\\text{O}}=10. \\ \\text{mol
H}\_2\\text{O}](ck12_math_images_dir/4cc5b44083a559ceeb2d66d9f75dc553.png)

We now can calculate the energy needed for the conversion:

![\\Delta H\_{fus} &=6.0 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\\\Delta H &= 10 \\
\\text{mol H}\_2\\text{O} \\times \\frac{6.0 \\ \\text{kJ}}{1 \\
\\text{mol H}\_2\\text{O}}=60. \\
\\text{kJ}](ck12_math_images_dir/f00b04a1912cad821a30c07a336b3f77.png)

A more complicated situation might involve temperature increases in
addition to the phase change. When this is the case, we will need to use
specific heat data along with the molar heats of fusion or vaporization.

**Example 17.4**

How much energy is needed to convert 180 grams of ice at -12°C to liquid
water at 25°C?

*Answer:*

There are three components to this problem:

1.  Calculation of the energy needed to raise the temperature of the ice
    from -12°C to 0°C
2.  Calculation of the energy needed for the transition from solid ice
    to liquid water (calculated in the previous example problem)
3.  Calculation of the energy needed to raise the temperature of the
    liquid water from 0°C to 25°C

The portions that require calculating the energy associated with
temperature changes will make use of the following equation:

![\\Delta H = m \\times c \\times \\Delta
T](ck12_math_images_dir/8d9c923c0b52a0989ef6c8ddf6b72152.png)

First, calculate the energy associated with the temperature change for
ice:

![\\Delta H =(180\\ \\text{g})(\\frac{2.09\\
\\text{J}}{\\text{g}\\cdot\^\\circ\\text{C}})(12\^\\circ
\\text{C})=4514.4 \\
\\text{J}](ck12_math_images_dir/9100fd01b50d8d4c7ef20f8465708920.png)

Second, recall from the previous problem that melting 180 grams of ice
requires 60 kJ (60,000 J) of energy.

Third, calculate the energy needed to change the temperature of the
liquid water. Again, note that ice and liquid water have different
specific heat values.

![\\Delta H =(180\\ \\text{g})(\\frac{4.18\\
\\text{J}}{\\text{g}\\cdot\^\\circ \\text{C}})(25\^\\circ
\\text{C})=18810 \\
\\text{J}](ck12_math_images_dir/d6bbdc8708184662d84358a7f001e96b.png)

Finally, add all of these energetic requirements together to find the
energy needed for the entire change. Make sure that all values have the
same units (J or kJ, but not both).

![\\Delta H =4,514.4 \\ \\text{J}+60,000 \\ \\text{J}+18,810 \\
\\text{J} = 83,324.4 \\
\\text{J}](ck12_math_images_dir/95ad0bc8c9837e60a67cae3e59e88ce4.png)

Rounded to the correct number of significant figures, this process would
require the input of 83,000 J (83 kJ) of energy.

Note that the enthalpy change is positive, indicating that we need to
put energy into the system in order to achieve the desired transition.
When going “downhill” from vapor to liquid or liquid to solid, we need
to remember to change the sign for ΔH. If we were to do the reverse
process, cooling liquid water at 25°C to ice at -12°C, ΔH would be -83
kJ, indicating that 83 kJ of energy would be removed from the system
during this transition.

## Heat of Solution {#17.html#x-ck12-SGVhdCBvZiBTb2x1dGlvbg.._2-0qw}

If you were to prepare a large solution of sulfuric acid in water, it
would be wise to cool the container in which the mixing is taking place.
The addition of a strong acid to water releases a great deal of heat
(which is why it is better to add the acid to the water and not the
water to the acid). The **heat of solution** for a substance tells us
how much energy is absorbed or released when one mole of the substance
is fully dissolved in a specific solvent. We will only consider heat of
solution values for which water is the solvent, but other solvents would
have different values for a given solute. The heats of solution for
several common solutes are listed in the **Table**
[below](#17.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6aGVhdHNfb2Zfc29sdXRpb24.) . In each
case, assume that the solute is added to a large excess of water, so the
solute dissolves completely.

  Material           Heat of Solution (kJ/mol)
  ------------------ ---------------------------
  H ~2~ SO ~4~ (l)   -96.2
  MgSO ~4~ (s)       -91.2
  CaCl ~2~ (s)       -82.9
  KOH(s)             -56
  NaOH(s)            -44.3
  NaCl(s)            3.9
  NaHCO ~3~ (s)      16.7
  KNO ~3~ (s)        35

Some materials have negative heats of solution; the dissolution of one
of these solutes in water is an exothermic process. Heat is released,
causing a net increase in the temperature of the solution. Conversely,
other substances have positive heats of solution. For example, the
dissolution of potassium nitrate in water is an endothermic process. The
resulting absorption of energy causes the solution to become colder.
Calculations involving heats of solutions follow the same basic approach
that we have used with other enthalpy problems.

**Example 17.5**

How much heat would be absorbed or released if we completely dissolved
0.45 moles of sulfuric acid in water?

*Answer:*

Since the heat of solution for H ~2~ SO ~4~ is negative, heat will be
released during this process. The exact amount can be calculated as
follows:

![\\Delta H=0.45 \\ \\text{mol} \\ \\text{H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4 \\times
\\frac{-96.2\\ \\text{kJ}}{1 \\ \\text{mol H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4}=-43 \\
\\text{kJ}](ck12_math_images_dir/0d251ef775f3a77a1ec961e1296a644d.png)
If we wanted to know the temperature change that this would cause, we
would need more information.

**Example 17.6**

If we dissolved 0.45 moles of sulfuric acid in 1.0 liter of water at
25.0°C, what would be the final temperature of the solution, assuming no
heat is lost to the surroundings? Assume that the specific heat of the
solution is the same as the specific heat of pure water.

*Answer:*

To answer this question, we will need to make use of the following
equation:

![\\Delta H = m \\times c \\times \\Delta
T](ck12_math_images_dir/8d9c923c0b52a0989ef6c8ddf6b72152.png)

Solving for the unknown variable (ΔT), we get the following:

![\\Delta T = \\frac{\\Delta H}{m \\times
c}](ck12_math_images_dir/75683ef5e13b69f395dd5028444ca5a0.png)

We already know that 43 kJ of energy will be released into the solution.
Because the specific heat is in units of joules, not kilojoules, we will
want to use the value 43,000 J instead so that the units cancel out. The
specific heat of the solution is assumed to be the same as that of pure
water (4.18 J/g•°C). Now, we need to find the mass of the solution. At
25°C, 1.0 L of water has a mass of 1.0 kg (1,000 g). The mass of the
sulfuric acid can be calculated as follows:

![0.45 \\ \\text{mol H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4 \\times \\frac{98.08 \\ \\text{g
H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4}{1 \\ \\text{mol H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4}=44 \\ \\text{g
H}\_2\\text{SO}\_4](ck12_math_images_dir/ec69ba16fa07b7df184f1c840676506a.png)

Therefore, the total mass of the solution would be 1,044 grams. Plugging
these values into the above equation, we get the following temperature
change:

![\\Delta T = \\frac{43,000 \\ \\text{J}}{1,044 \\ \\text{g} \\times
\\frac{4.18\\ \\text{J}}{\\text{g}\\cdot\^\\circ \\text{C}}}=9.9\^\\circ
\\text{C}](ck12_math_images_dir/f4bdb38d01751803b432889afd94c2a6.png)

The final temperature of the solution would be 34.9°C, which is 9.9°C
higher than the initial temperature of 25.0°C.

These principles are applied when we use heat packs or cold packs for
sore muscles. A heat pack contains water and a solid such as calcium
chloride or magnesium sulfate. When the pack is activated, the two
materials mix and heat is released. This is because the heats of
solution are negative indicating an exothermic reaction. Some packs can
get as warm as 90°C. Cold packs use materials such as ammonium nitrate,
which has a large positive heat of solution. The endothermic mixing
process can cool the solution down to just a few degrees Celsius.

## Lesson Summary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-dpz}

-   Specific heat and heat capacity provide information about enthalpy
    changes when the temperature of a substance is altered but no
    changes of state take place.
-   Molar heats of fusion and vaporization allow calculations of energy
    changes involving a phase transition.
-   Combinations of the above parameters can be used to calculate total
    energy changes for transitions that involve both temperature changes
    and changes of state.
-   Heat of solution data provides information about enthalpy changes
    that occur when a solute dissolves in a solvent.

## Lesson Review Questions {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-tfp}

### Reviewing Concepts {#17.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz_2-hpb}

1.  Define the following terms:
    1.  heat of fusion
    2.  heat of vaporization
    3.  heat of solution

2.  Indicate whether the following processes are exothermic or
    endothermic:
    1.  melting of water
    2.  conversion of liquid bromine to a gas
    3.  condensation of chlorine gas
    4.  conversion of sodium chloride crystals to molten (liquid) NaCl

### Problems {#17.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM._2-yuv}

1.  Mercury melts at -39°C. How much energy is required to melt 150.
    grams of mercury if its molar heat of fusion is 2.29 kJ/mol?
2.  Sulfur has a boiling point of 444.6°C. If the heat of vaporization
    for sulfur is 45 kJ/mol, how much heat is released when 42 grams of
    sulfur vapor is converted to liquid sulfur?
3.  Calculate the total enthalpy change when 200. grams of water vapor
    at 120°C is converted to liquid water at 42°C.
4.  How much energy is involved in dissolving 76 grams of NaCl in water?
    Is this an exothermic or endothermic process?
5.  Calculate the total energy involved in converting 50. grams of ice
    at -10°C to liquid water at 95°C.
6.  If the heat of solution for LiBr is -49 kJ/mol, how many grams of
    LiBr must be dissolved in order to release 3,500 joules of energy?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#17.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-fqc}

-   Specific heat and heat capacity:
    [http://www.iun.edu/\~cpanhd/C101webnotes/matter-and-energy/specificheat.html](specificheat.html)
-   Heat of solution:
    [http://sunny.moorparkcollege.edu/\~chemistry/chemistry\_1B\_labs/experiment\_one.pdf](experiment_one.pdf)
-   Visual illustration of heats of solution:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o7adWQqvDUU](watch?v=o7adWQqvDUU)

## Points to Consider {#17.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-hki}

-   How do you determine the enthalpy of formation for a reaction that
    is not feasible to run in the laboratory?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686147] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686148] -->

# Hess's Law {#17.html#x-ck12-SGVzcydzIExhdw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._3-2ir}

-   State Hess’s law.
-   Use Hess’s law to calculate standard enthalpy of formation values.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._3-tpu}

-   **Hess’s law** : States that the enthalpy change between a set of
    reactants and a set of products will be the same, regardless of the
    number of reactions or steps that take place in between the
    two states.

## Check Your Understanding {#17.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_3-p1p}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#17.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._3-gdb}

The enthalpy of a reaction can be calculated from standard heat of
formation values by using the following equation:

![\\Delta H\_{rxn}=\\Sigma n \\Delta H\_f(products) - \\Sigma n \\Delta
H\_f(reactants)](ck12_math_images_dir/b93a2ceae456dc3398c3743014021d09.png)

## Introduction {#17.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_3-2vp}

If you wished to travel from Memphis, Tennessee (home of the blues) to
Nashville, Tennessee (home of country music), there are several
available routes. You could take Interstate 40 east to Nashville, which
would be a very direct route. You might want to head north on Interstate
55 to visit Cape Girardeau, Missouri before you turn onto U.S 61, and
then Interstate 24 would take you to Nashville. Or you may decide to go
south to Birmingham, Alabama on Interstate 22 before turning left on
Interstate 65 to head back north to Nashville. Whatever the route
chosen, all the different alternatives still take you to Nashville. The
amount that you have driven depends on your route, but the overall
distance between your starting point and your destination is independent
of the path that you took. In this lesson, you will see that the
energetics of a chemical reaction can be thought of in a similar way.

## Hess’s Law {#17.html#x-ck12-SGVzc-KAmXMgTGF3_3-6bb}

In the 19th century, the Swiss-born Russian chemist Germain Hess
(1802-1850) developed a law of heat summation, often referred to as
**Hess’s Law** . This law states that the enthalpy change between a set
of reactants and a set of products will be the same, regardless of the
number of reactions or steps that take place in between the two states.
In other words, the overall enthalpy change does not depend on how you
got from start to finish.

<div
id="17.html#x-ck12-ZmNlNDAyMmY1Yzk2NTVmZmE1YTUxYmE5M2FkOTc1NjE.-cuw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:S Levchenkov/Ru.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hessov_zakon_01.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_17_files/20151009235333596616.jpeg)

**Figure 17.7**

The specific path leading to the formation of the different B products
from A reactants does not influence the overall enthalpy change. ΔH ~1~
= ΔH ~2~ + ΔH ~3~ = ΔH ~4~ + ΔH ~5~ + ΔH ~6~

</div>

## Indirect Method for Determining the Standard Heat of Formation {#17.html#x-ck12-SW5kaXJlY3QgTWV0aG9kIGZvciBEZXRlcm1pbmluZyB0aGUgU3RhbmRhcmQgSGVhdCBvZiBGb3JtYXRpb24._3-hiu}

In the previous lesson, we made use of standard heat of formation
values. Although the energy changes can sometimes be measured directly
when a compound is generated from its constituent elements in their
standard forms, many such reactions are difficult or unfeasible. An
alternative way to measure the standard heat of formation is to measure
the enthalpy changes for a series of reactions that result in the same
net change. The general rules for manipulating thermochemical equations
are as follows:

1.  When adding two (or more) equations together, their ΔH ~rxn~ values
    should also be added together.
2.  Reversing the direction of a chemical equation reverses the sign of
    the enthalpy change but does not affect its magnitude.
3.  If we multiply all components of a chemical reaction by some number,
    the enthalpy change should be multiplied by the same number.

In general, we are given a set of equations with known ΔH ~rxn~ values,
and by reversing or multiplying each equation by some factor, we can add
them all together to give us the desired transformation. This can be
shown most easily through an example.

**Example 17.7**

We want to determine ΔH ~f~ for NO ~2~ (g), but the formation reaction
shown below is difficult to measure directly:

![\\frac{1}{2} \\text{N}\_2(g)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}\_2(g) \\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\; \\Delta H\_f\^\\circ = \\ ? \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/fd3d50e1768a5c56d17da470cc6e4ea4.png)

However, we can measure the enthalpy changes for the following two
reactions:

![&\\frac{1}{2}\\text{N}\_2(g)+\\frac{1}{2}\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}(g) && \\Delta H\_f\^\\circ = 90 \\ \\text{kJ/mol}
\\\\\\&\\text{NO}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}(g)+\\frac{1}{2}\\text{O}\_2(g) && \\Delta H\^\\circ = 56 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/28aea46623859c4daeef1494f96248bc.png)

Use these values to determine the standard heat of formation for NO ~2~
(g).

*Answer:*

We would like to manipulate the two known reactions so that when they
are added together and we cancel the common terms (the compounds that
appear on both the reactant and product sides), the net result is our
desired transformation. In the desired reaction, nitrogen and oxygen
gases are reactants, and NO ~2~ (g) is a product. If we reverse the
second known equation, NO ~2~ (g) will be a product. When reversing the
direction of a chemical reaction, the magnitude of the enthalpy change
stays the same, but the sign is reversed.

![\\text{NO}(g)+\\frac{1}{2}\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}\_2(g)\\;\\;\\;\\; \\Delta H\^\\circ = -56 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/a89958da363eb55e56fffc3fcaa3c809.png)

Now we can add the two reactions:

![& \\frac{1}{2}\\text{N}\_2(g)+\\frac{1}{2}\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}(g) && \\Delta H\_f\^\\circ = 90 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\&
\\text{NO}(g)+\\frac{1}{2}\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{NO}\_2(g)
&& \\Delta H\^\\circ = -56 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\\\hline&
\\frac{1}{2}\\text{N}\_2(g)+\\text{O}\_2(g)+\\text{NO}(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}(g)+\\text{NO}\_2(g) && \\Delta H\^\\circ = 34 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/aefc549d3790bb06d850c2302c0fc716.png)

The ΔH value for this transformation is the sum of the two simpler
reactions. The final equation can also be simplified. The NO cancels
out, because it is on both sides of the equation, leaving only the
desired transformation:

![\\frac{1}{2} \\text{N}\_2(g)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{NO}\_2(g) \\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\; \\Delta H\_f\^\\circ =34 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/c3f6cdb689b886def9fc0d2fc91e8807.png)

Note that the enthalpy change for any transformation can be determined
in this way; this method can be used for more than just finding heat of
formation values.

**Example 17.8**

What is ΔH ~rxn~ for the following reaction?

![\\text{CS}\_2(l)+3\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{CO}\_2(g)+2\\text{SO}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/4ad74aa82e4ce8feece683ba70726c32.png)

The following formation reactions have known ΔH values:

![& \\text{C}(s)+2\\text{S} (s)\\rightarrow \\text{CS}\_2(l) && \\Delta
H\_f =87.9 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\&
\\text{C}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{CO}\_2(g) && \\Delta
H\_f = -393.5 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\&
\\text{S}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{SO}\_2(g) && \\Delta
H\_f=-296.8 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/8dfa6f6e0991330cd5e185fd63578e41.png)

*Answer:*

Which components of the first known equation are part of the desired
reaction? Carbon and sulfur are not involved in the desired
transformation, but one molecule of CS ~2~ is present as a reactant. If
we reverse the first equation, we get the following:

![\\text{CS}\_2(l)\\rightarrow \\text{C}(s)+2\\text{S}(s)\\;\\;\\;\\;
\\Delta H=-87.9 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/a4bd9e4ed5bf25e3ac78fa33bada742d.png)

Now, look at the second equation. A single molecule of CO ~2~ is present
as a product, which is what we want for our final equation. Since CO ~2~
does not show up in any of the other equations, we can assume that this
equation will be used as is:

![\\text{C}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{CO}\_2(g)\\;\\;\\;\\;
\\Delta H=-393.5 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/991db4b82d36c9c73c2c5b9ac219db51.png)

Finally, look at the third known equation. It has a single molecule of
SO ~2~ as a product. However, we need two molecules of SO ~2~ on the
product side, so we multiply the entire equation, including its ΔH
value, by a factor of two:

![2\\text{S}(s)+2\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow 2\\text{SO}\_2(g)\\;\\;\\;
\\Delta H=-593.6 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/f44f73b7bc7dfe44453554bba7b101ad.png)

Now, add these three equations together:

![& \\text{CS}\_2(l)\\rightarrow \\text{C}(s)+2\\text{S}(s) && \\Delta
H=-87.9 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\&
\\text{C}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{CO}\_2(g) && \\Delta
H=-393.5 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\&
2\\text{S}(s)+2\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow 2\\text{SO}\_2(g) && \\Delta
H=-593.6 \\ \\text{kJ/mol} \\\\\\\\hline&
\\text{CS}\_2(l)+3\\text{O}\_2(g)+\\text{C}(s)+2\\text{S}(s)\\rightarrow
\\text{CO}\_2(g)+2\\text{SO}\_2(g)+\\text{C}(s)+2\\text{S}(s) && \\Delta
H=-1075.0 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/4f3fd563bbfa4e6d5a362b8fb75e77d0.png)

One mole of carbon and two moles of sulfur appear on both sides of the
equation. Cancelling out these terms, we are left with the desired
reaction:

![\\text{CS}\_2(l)+3\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow
\\text{CO}\_2(g)+2\\text{SO}\_2(g)\\;\\; \\Delta H=-1075.0 \\
\\text{kJ/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/587906ba06000f8bb3ffeddb870528a8.png)

## Lesson Summary {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._3-9oe}

-   Hess’s law states that the enthalpy change for a given
    transformation depends only on the initial and final states, and not
    on how many stages or steps are taken in between.
-   Standard enthalpies of formation can be calculated indirectly using
    the ΔH ~rxn~ values for reactions that are easier to
    measure directly.

## Lesson Review Questions {#17.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._3-xu2}

### Reviewing Concepts {#17.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz_3-ufb}

1.  State Hess’s law.
2.  Why is this law important?

### Problems {#17.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM._3-0ic}

1.  Calculate the heat released by the burning of sulfur in oxygen:
    ![2\\text{S}(s)+3\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow 2\\text{SO}\_3(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/ebe6395170c182b879cd3141b14fe195.png) .
    ΔH values are known for the following reactions: ![&
    \\text{S}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{SO}\_2(g) && \\Delta
    H=-296 \\ \\text{kJ} \\\\\\&
    2\\text{SO}\_2(g)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow 2\\text{SO}\_3(g) &&
    \\Delta H=-198 \\
    \\text{kJ}](ck12_math_images_dir/14effdca258f2133b40b3ad0a28fd383.png)
2.  Calculate ΔH for the following reaction, which describes the
    production of syn-gas from carbon:
    ![\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(g)+\\text{C}(s)\\rightarrow \\text{CO}(g)+\\text{H}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/ef53b60ad68b13ab02045a791fd7b6e6.png) .
    The following enthalpy changes are known: ![&
    \\text{H}\_2(g)+\\frac{1}{2}
    \\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(g) && \\Delta
    H=-242.0 \\ \\text{kJ} \\\\\\&
    2\\text{CO}(g)\\rightarrow 2\\text{C}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g) && \\Delta
    H=+221.0 \\
    \\text{kJ}](ck12_math_images_dir/c8ec96cae8039f82c365f1ad0c28e88a.png)
3.  Calculate the heat of reaction for the following equation:
    ![\\text{C}\_3\\text{H}\_8(g)+5\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow 3\\text{CO}\_2(g)+4\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/7c2f55766f0ed17a5513be88f51f8679.png) .
    The following formation reactions have known ΔH values: ![&
    3\\text{C}(s)+4\\text{H}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{C}\_3\\text{H}\_8(g)
    && \\Delta H = -103.8 \\ \\text{kJ} \\\\\\&
    2\\text{H}\_2(g)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow 2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(g)
    && \\Delta H = -484 \\ \\text{kJ} \\\\\\&
    \\text{C}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g)\\rightarrow \\text{CO}\_2(g) && \\Delta
    H = -393 \\
    \\text{kJ}](ck12_math_images_dir/1ee4e6e6ebdb965ea41b8d2bd94e9811.png)

## Further Reading / Supplemental Link {#17.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbms._3-gev}

-   Hess’s Law:
    [http://www.science.uwaterloo.ca/\~cchieh/cact/c120/hess.html](hess.html)
-   Hess’s Law worked example:
    [http://www.utc.edu/Faculty/Gretchen-Potts/chemistryhelp/hess.htm](hess.htm)
-   Hess’s Law video:
    [http://www.khanacademy.org/science/physics/thermodynamics/v/hess-s-law-and-reaction-enthalpy-change](hess-s-law-and-reaction-enthalpy-change)

## Points to Consider {#17.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_3-1tj}

-   How do chemical reactions occur?
-   What affects the rate of a chemical reaction?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686148] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#17.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-qll}

1.  Department of Energy, User:Helix84/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:First\_law\_open\_system.png](File:First_law_open_system.png) .
    Public Domain
2.  CK-12 Foundation. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
3.  User:Li-on/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Calorimeter.svg](File:Calorimeter.svg) .
    Public Domain
4.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
5.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
6.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
7.  User:S Levchenkov/Ru.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hessov\_zakon\_01.jpg](File:Hessov_zakon_01.jpg) .
    Public Domain

<span id="18.html"></span>

# Kinetics {#18.html#x-ck12-S2luZXRpY3M.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_18_files/20151009235340755205.jpeg)
</span>

The cars roar around the oval track at speeds up to 200 miles/hour. The
victor is determined by who crosses the finish line first after a
pre-determined number of laps have been driven. Speed is a major factor
in winning, but there is also a heavy dose of strategy, driving skill,
and some luck in avoiding crashes.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_18_files/20151009235340896489.jpeg)
</span>

Drag racing involves one basic issue: who can get to the finish line the
fastest. The strip is a quarter-mile in length and is straight. Driving
skill is important and luck always plays a role. In drag racing the car
with the fastest acceleration has an advantage, but top speed is also
important. The Top Fuel category (running on nitromethane) record is
over 330 miles per hour at the finish line (that’s from a standing start
and a quarter-mile distance).

Speed is important both on the track and in the chemistry lab. We want
to know how fast a reaction occurs for several reasons. The reaction
rate can give us useful information about how the reaction occurs. In a
manufacturing plant, if the speed of a reaction can be increased, the
chemical product can be made in less time, which often means a lower
manufacturing cost.

^U.S.\\ Air\\ Force.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:NASCAR\_practice.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

^Flickr:50\\ Prime.\\ www.flickr.com/photos/pernett/1629379219/.\\ CC\\ BY\\ 2.0.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686150] -->

# Rates of Reactions {#18.html#x-ck12-UmF0ZXMgb2YgUmVhY3Rpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-bue}

-   Define “rate.”
-   Describe collision theory as it relates to chemical reactions.
-   List and describe factors that affect the rate of a
    chemical reaction.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-sqq}

-   **reaction rate** : The change in concentration of a reactant or
    product with time.
-   **collision theory** : Molecules need to collide in order for a
    reaction to take place.
-   **activation energy** : The energy that is needed to get reactants
    close enough together for a reaction to occur.
-   **activated complex** : The highest energy state that must be passed
    through in order for reactants to convert into products.
-   **catalyst** : A substance that speeds up the rate of reaction by
    providing a lower energy pathway but does not undergo any
    change itself.

## Check Your Understanding {#18.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-ar1}

What do energy versus reaction progress graphs look like for exothermic
and endothermic reactions?

## Introduction {#18.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-2kg}

In our discussion of car racing, we talked about the speed of the
vehicles. Car speed is measured in miles/hour (or kilometers/hour in
countries using the metric system). A race car traveling at a speed of
200 miles/hour could go a distance of 200 miles in one hour. A rate
indicates the extent of some change in relation to the amount of time
that has passed. The rate of travel for a car or other object tells us
what distance is traversed in a given unit of time. If we know the total
distance traveled and the total time taken, we can calculate the rate as
follows:

![Rate=\\frac{\\Delta distance}{\\Delta
time}](ck12_math_images_dir/2d5351f851432aff09109979b8ae9df6.png)

Rates can also be expressed for changes in variables other than physical
location. In this lesson, you will learn how to use rates to describe
chemical reactions.

## What is a Rate? {#18.html#x-ck12-V2hhdCBpcyBhIFJhdGU_-gzx}

When studying chemical reactions, we are interested in how quickly the
amount or concentration of a given reactant or product changes over
time. This is known as the **reaction rate** . Mathematically, the
reaction rate can be expressed by either of the following equations:

![Rate&=-\\frac{\\Delta \[reactant\]}{\\Delta time}
\\\\\\Rate&=\\frac{\\Delta \[product\]}{\\Delta
time}](ck12_math_images_dir/be284a89783e63aabd816589147ccc30.png)

Because the concentrations of the reactants decrease over time, the
negative sign in the first equation above means that the reaction rate
will be a positive value.

**Example 18.1**

The initial concentration of a given reactant is 0.45 M. After two
minutes, its concentration is measured and found to be 0.35 M. What is
the rate of this reaction?

*Answer:*

Use the appropriate rate equation and fill in the given values:

![Rate &=-\\frac{\\Delta \[reactant\]}{\\Delta time} \\\\\\Rate
&=-\\frac{c(final)-c(initial)}{t(final)-t(initial)} \\\\\\Rate
&=-\\frac{0.35 \\ \\text{M}-0.45 \\ \\text{M}}{2\\ \\text{min}-0 \\
\\text{min}} \\\\\\Rate &=-\\frac{-0.10 \\ \\text{M}}{2\\ \\text{min}}
\\\\\\Rate &=0.05 \\
\\text{M/min}](ck12_math_images_dir/353b1f0f9496f88ff7d3b677dd12eca6.png)

The concentrations of reactants and products are always measured in
moles/liter (M) when discussing reaction rates.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-amy"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341080287.png)

**Figure 18.1**

</div>

For real reactions, we also need to consider the coefficients from the
balanced equation. For example, in the reaction 2A → B, the rate of
disappearance of A is twice the rate of formation of B, as can be
inferred from the stoichiometric coefficients. The rate of product
formation can be expressed as follows:

![Rate=\\frac{\\Delta \[B\]}{\\Delta
t}](ck12_math_images_dir/7a3c89ea5f156f10176b8cdb097e43d2.png)

However, the rate of disappearance of reactant A is twice the rate of
formation of product B. We want to end up with the same reaction rate
value regardless of which reaction component is being considered. In
order to achieve this, we need to write each rate with respect to the
coefficient on the corresponding reaction component.

In the basic reaction formula above, we have determined that the rate of
disappearance of reactant A is twice the rate of formation of product B.
This means that the rate expression above for the product B is
equivalent to the following in terms of the reactant A:

![Rate=-\\frac{1}{2}\\frac{\\Delta \[A\]}{\\Delta
t}](ck12_math_images_dir/8f36c7e1cfb484f6089c41968194ae94.png)

By accounting for the coefficients in the balanced chemical equation,
these two rates are equal and we can also say the following:

![\\frac{\\Delta \[B\]}{\\Delta t}=-\\frac{1}{2}\\frac{\\Delta
\[A\]}{\\Delta
t}](ck12_math_images_dir/e2b026de0a875afbf766955b6bd4aee6.png)

## Collision Theory {#18.html#x-ck12-Q29sbGlzaW9uIFRoZW9yeQ..-gbo}

**Collision theory** states that chemical reactions occur when atoms,
ions, or molecules collide. In other words, these species need to make
contact with one another in order for a reaction to take place. Based on
this concept, along with a couple of other key points, collision theory
helps to explain why certain factors will influence the rate of a
chemical reaction.

We discussed earlier some basic principles about the behavior of gases
called the kinetic-molecular theory. Among other things, this theory
suggests that gas molecules are in constant motion, and the average
speed of the individual gas particles is dependent upon temperature –
the higher the temperature, the faster the molecules move. It is not
just gas particles that are in constant motion. The molecules and ions
that make up liquids and solutions are also continually moving in nearly
random directions. As a result, molecules and ions in a solution will
collide with one another fairly frequently. As with gases, a temperature
increase will produce an increase in the average particle speed.

However, not all collisions between reactant molecules will result in
the formation of a product. The colliding particles must possess a
minimum amount of energy in order for the reactant-product transition to
occur. In the *Thermochemistry* chapter, we saw that simple exothermic
reactions have an energy diagram that looks something like **Figure**
[below](#18.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMThfNQ..) .

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-MmNhYTA4NzFlN2RlYmNmYzIxYTk5YjExMTYxNWM3MWM.-zap"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341205446.png)

**Figure 18.2**

Activation energy for an exothermic reaction.

</div>

Although the overall process involves a release of energy (the products
are lower energy than the reactants), a certain initial amount of energy
needs to be present before the reaction can occur. The amount of energy
required to get over the "hump" in the reaction diagram is referred to
as the **activation energy** of the reaction. At the top of the peak,
the reactants form what is known as an activated complex. The
**activated complex** is the highest energy state that must be achieved
in order for reactants to convert into products.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-MmZiMzkzMWFmYTUwZmQ1NWMwZGVhNDgzODA3MWVhOTc.-6ac"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Peter Lai" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341332167.jpeg)

**Figure 18.3**

Formation of activated complex with subsequent release of products.

</div>

In the **Figure** [above](#18.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMThfNg..) , the
starred compound in the center represents the activated complex. For the
indicated transformation, the reactant molecules must come into contact
with enough energy to partially break the A-B and C-D bonds that are
initially present. If the molecules are simultaneously able to partially
form the A-C and B-D bonds in the product, the energetic barrier will
not be quite as high, but breaking any chemical bonds requires at least
an initial input of energy.

## Factors Affecting Reaction Rate {#18.html#x-ck12-RmFjdG9ycyBBZmZlY3RpbmcgUmVhY3Rpb24gUmF0ZQ..-m95}

Several factors influence the rate at which a reaction proceeds. Many of
these effects can be predicted and rationalized using the basic concepts
of collision theory.

### Concentration {#18.html#x-ck12-Q29uY2VudHJhdGlvbg..-klf}

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-ZjE2YjdmYTgwMDhlNTJmOTM0Nzc1NDk5ZmNlMDBkZGI.-a5p"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:SameerKhan/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harbor_Fwy_Traffic.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341463901.jpeg)

**Figure 18.4**

</div>

Collision theory tells us that molecules need to collide in order for a
reaction to take place. All else being equal, anything that increases
the frequency of collisions would also increase the rate of reaction.
One way to do this is to increase the concentrations of one or more of
the reactants. Using a real world example, a busy freeway will
experience much more frequent car collisions than a fairly empty
neighborhood street. Similarly, forcing more randomly moving molecules
into the same amount of space will cause an increased number of
collisions over a given length of time, providing the reactants with
more opportunities to transform into products.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-MjM0OTVlYzY2NTc0OWEwNWIzMTg5NmI1NTk5OTQyZmQ.-jga"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Sadi_Carnot/Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Molecular-collisions.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341578883.jpeg)

**Figure 18.5**

</div>

### Pressure {#18.html#x-ck12-UHJlc3N1cmU.-g2p}

If the pressure of a gaseous mixture is increased by decreasing the
available volume, we are effectively pushing the same amount of material
into a smaller overall volume. In other words, we are increasing the
concentration of the gaseous materials. As we just discussed, an
increase in concentration leads to more frequent collisions, thus
increasing the rate of reaction.

Note that increasing the external pressure on liquids and solids, which
are relatively incompressible, has very little effect on the reaction
rate. The volume will be decreased very little, if any, so no
significant increase in concentration will result from the pressure
change.

### Temperature {#18.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmU.-d1q}

As the temperature of a system increases, the average speed of its
particles also increases. If particles are moving faster, they cover
more distance in a shorter amount of time, which increases the frequency
of collisions. As a result, the rate of any potential reaction is
increased.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-YWVhMGU4M2E4YmMwN2NiYTU4NDM0Y2JiMzkyNWE5YjM.-gmy"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341698096.png)

**Figure 18.6**

Effect of temperature on reaction rate.

</div>

Additionally, there is another way in which increasing the temperature
will increase the rate of a reaction. Fundamentally, the temperature of
a substance is a measure of the average kinetic energy of its individual
particles. Recall that a collision will only lead to a reaction if the
colliding reactants have enough energy to overcome the activation
barrier. Increasing the average kinetic energy of the reactants makes it
more likely that any given collision will result in a transformation
from reactants to products.

For example, the reaction of wood with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide
and water is a very exothermic reaction. The excess energy is released
as heat and light, which we experience as fire. However, wood can be
stored in the air almost indefinitely without bursting into flames. In
order for wood to burn, enough energy needs to be added to overcome the
initial activation energy barrier. This can be accomplished by
increasing the temperature of a small amount of the wood, often by
exposing it to another source of flame or the focused rays of the sun.
Once the reaction begins, the energy given off by the exothermic
combustion process heats the surrounding wood, thus providing the
necessary activation energy for continued burning.

### Surface Area {#18.html#x-ck12-U3VyZmFjZSBBcmVh-mcq}

Many reactions take place in solution or in the gas phase, where the
reactants are evenly dispersed throughout a homogeneous mixture.
However, for reactions in which one of the reactants is a pure solid or
liquid (meaning that this reactant is not already mixed together with
any other reactants), reactivity only occurs at the surface, where
particles of the solid or liquid reactant come into contact with
particles of the other reactants. All of the molecules or ions in the
interior of the pure substance will not be colliding with the other
necessary reactants, so they are not really contributing to the overall
rate of the reaction. However, increasing the surface area will increase
the frequency of potentially reactive collisions, because more reactant
particles will be in contact with the other necessary reactants.

For example, if a solid pellet of NaOH is placed into a chamber of HCl
gas, a relatively slow acid-base reaction will occur between gaseous HCl
molecules and hydroxide ions on the surface of the pellet. If we were to
grind the pellet into smaller pieces, it would greatly increase the
total surface area, and therefore the overall reaction rate. Once ground
up, many hydroxide ions that were on the interior of the pellet, where
they were not exposed to any HCl molecules, will now be on the surface,
where the necessary collisions can occur.

### Catalysts {#18.html#x-ck12-Q2F0YWx5c3Rz-rh5}

A **catalyst** is a material that speeds up the rate of a reaction
without being consumed by the reaction. For example, the following
reaction is very slow, even when heated:

![2\\text{KClO}\_3\\rightarrow
2\\text{KCl}+3\\text{O}\_2](ck12_math_images_dir/ec39823a0701bffcadb7aee8dda9fdda.png)

However, adding a tiny amount of manganese dioxide (MnO ~2~ ) to a
solution of potassium chlorate (KClO ~3~ ) results in a dramatic
increase in the rate at which oxygen gas is produced. At the end of the
reaction, the manganese dioxide can be recovered. This is because it is
not actually used up in the reaction, but merely facilitates the
reaction.

A catalyst works by providing a lower energy pathway from reactants to
products. The use of a catalyst involves intermediate reactions which
have lower activation complexes than the original reaction. On a
simplified reaction energy diagram, this can be thought of as lowering
the activation energy for a given transformation. If the activation
energy of a reaction is decreased, more collisions will have enough
energy to overcome this lower barrier, so the reactant-to-product
transformation will occur more frequently. As a result, the overall
reaction rate will be higher than for an identical reaction with a
larger activation energy barrier.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-z3m"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341816969.png)

**Figure 18.7**

</div>

Another example of a catalytic process is the reaction between an alkene
(a carbon-carbon double bond) and hydrogen gas. Due to the details of
how covalent bonds are broken and formed, a simple collision between
these two molecules will not result in the formation of a product. In
the absence of a catalyst, very high energy intermediates, which involve
the complete breakage of an H-H single bond, would be required for this
process to occur. Because of the very large activation energy required,
this uncatalyzed reaction would only occur in extremely high
temperatures.

However, the addition of a metal catalyst, such as platinum, provides a
lower energy pathway. The energy requirements for breaking the H-H bond
are offset somewhat if each hydrogen atom can form a new bond with the
metal surface. Then, collisions between the alkene and the
metal-hydrogen complex result in the formation of a product. The metal
surface is regenerated after the hydrogen atoms are removed, so it is
not used up by the reaction, but it increases the rate by stabilizing
the high energy hydrogen atoms.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-MTI3ZTNmZWI4MmZmOGJmNjE0NjUwZDAwMDZiOTczNzc.-b2a"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Michael Schmid" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogenation_on_catalyst.png" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 1.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235341926280.png)

**Figure 18.8**

</div>

Catalytic converters in cars increase the rates of several important
reactions. Unburned hydrocarbons can more easily be converted to carbon
dioxide and water in the presence of a catalyst. Additionally, carbon
monoxide (a harmful gas produced by incomplete combustion of fuel) is
further oxidized to carbon dioxide, and nitrous oxide compounds (which
contribute to smog and acid rain) are transformed back into nitrogen and
oxygen gases. By passing car exhaust over these catalysts before their
release into the air, the emissions from a combustion engine are made
into much less harmful substances, resulting in a much cleaner
atmosphere.

Because these catalysts contain expensive metals (rhodium costs about
\$70.00/gram, platinum about \$50.00/gram, and palladium about
\$15.00/gram), the theft of catalytic converters is a growing problem. A
stolen catalytic converter can be sold for over \$100.00 at a junk yard.

## Lesson Summary {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-epf}

-   The rate of a reaction tells us how quickly the reactants are
    transformed into products. It can be expressed as the change in the
    concentration of a given reactant or product over a certain length
    of time.
-   Collision theory states that chemical reactions occur when reactants
    collide with enough energy to overcome the activation
    energy barrier.
-   The activated complex is the highest energy state that must be
    passed through in order for reactants to be transformed
    into products.
-   The activation energy of a reaction is the amount of energy
    necessary to form the activated complex from the initial reactants.
-   Several factors affect the rate of a chemical reaction, including
    concentration, pressure (for gases), temperature, surface area (for
    solids and liquids), and the presence of a catalyst. All of these
    factors can be rationalized by the basic ideas of collision theory.
-   A catalyst increases the rate of a reaction without being consumed.
    It accomplishes this by providing a lower energy pathway from
    reactants to products, thus decreasing the activation
    energy barrier.

## Lesson Review Questions {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-p6c}

### Reviewing Concepts {#18.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz-teo}

1.  How is the rate of a reaction typically described?
2.  Explain the reaction energy graph for an exothermic reaction in
    terms of collision theory.
3.  What is activation energy?
4.  For each of the following situations, tell whether the rate of the
    reaction would increase or decrease, and explain your answer in
    terms of collision theory.
    1.  The concentration of a reactant is doubled.
    2.  The reaction is moved from a lab bench at room temperature into
        an ice bath.
    3.  A solid crystalline reactant is broken into smaller pieces with
        a hammer.

### Problems {#18.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM.-k8f}

1.  In the reaction A + B → C, the initial concentration of A is
    0.054 M. After 1.5 minutes, \[A\] = 0.032 M. Calculate the rate of
    the reaction in M/sec.
2.  If the above reaction is run under different conditions, it might
    take 0.8 minutes for the concentration of product C to reach
    0.029 M. Assuming that no C was present initially, calculate the
    rate of formation of C in M/sec.
3.  Consider the following reaction: ![\\text{N}\_2 + 3\\text{H}\_2
    \\rightarrow 2
    \\text{NH}\_3](ck12_math_images_dir/05a783a2aaae201dc57578e19b7c5aef.png) .
    At a certain point in the reaction, hydrogen gas is being consumed
    at a rate of 0.096 M/sec. What is the rate at which ammonia is being
    formed at this point?
4.  The decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide is described by the
    reaction: ![2 \\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_5 (g) \\rightarrow 4
    \\text{NO}\_2 (g) +
    \\text{O}\_2 (g)](ck12_math_images_dir/4a040817f904427e6b93bc5507e4662d.png) .
    If O ~2~ is being formed at a rate of 2.40 mol/min, what is the rate
    at which N ~2~ O ~5~ is being used up?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#18.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-tdw}

-   Reaction rates:
    [http://www.chm.davidson.edu/vce/kinetics/ReactionRates.html](ReactionRates.html)
-   Reaction rate simulation:
    [http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/reactions-and-rates](reactions-and-rates)
-   Activation energy:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/ch22/activate.html](activate.html)
-   How a catalytic converter works:
    [http://www.howstuffworks.com/catalytic-converter.htm](catalytic-converter.htm)

## Points to Consider {#18.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-fqg}

-   How do we calculate the rate of a reaction?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686150] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686151] -->

# Rate Laws {#18.html#x-ck12-UmF0ZSBMYXdz}

## Lesson Objectives {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-plv}

-   Explain why reaction rates are often measured only at the very
    beginning of a reaction.
-   Derive rate laws based on initial rates of reaction.
-   Explain what it means for a reaction to be zero-order, first-order,
    or second-order with respect to a given reactant. Show how this
    information can be obtained from an experimental rate law.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-g7o}

-   **initial rate of reaction** : The rate of product formation (or
    reactant disappearance) that occurs directly after the reactants
    have been mixed.
-   **rate constant** : The proportionality constant "k".
-   **second-order** : Indicates an exponent of two; the rate increases
    twice as fast as the corresponding concentration.
-   **first-order** : Indicates an exponent of one; the rate increases
    directly with the corresponding concentration.
-   **zero-order** : Indicates an exponent of zero; the rate does not
    depend on the corresponding reactant concentration.

## Check Your Understanding {#18.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-aig}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#18.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._1-7ek}

-   What do we mean by the “rate” of a reaction?
-   How does the concentration of a reactant affect the rate of a
    reaction?

## Introduction {#18.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-xb9}

Imagine when you are hungry at the beginning of a meal. A large plate of
food is set in front of you, and you start eating quickly. As you become
full, you start eating more slowly. Or, maybe you start off eating
slowly and the food is so delicious that you start eating more rapidly.
The rate at which you eat may be changing throughout the meal based on
your level of satisfaction. The rate of chemical reactions can be
thought of in a similar way, as these rates do not necessarily stay
constant over time. In this lesson, you will learn how to use initial
rates and experimental data to determine rate laws.

## Initial Rate of Reaction {#18.html#x-ck12-SW5pdGlhbCBSYXRlIG9mIFJlYWN0aW9u_1-gu3}

If we were to graph the concentration of a reactant over time in a given
reaction, we might get a plot that looked something like **Figure**
[below](#18.html#x-ck12-Q29uY2VudHJhdGlvbl9yZWFjdGFudF92c190aW1l) . For
a given portion of the curve, the rate of disappearance is equal to the
slope at that point. Because the curve is not linear, it has different
slopes at different points. This means that the rate of reaction changes
over the course of the reaction. As the reactant is used up, its
concentration decreases, resulting in a slower rate for any subsequent
reactivity.

<div
id="18.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-ysl"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_18_files/20151009235342044321.png)

**Figure 18.9**

</div>

It is often difficult to monitor the exact concentrations of each
reactant in the middle of an ongoing reaction. However, much more
precise measurements can be made regarding the concentration of each
reactant before they are mixed and the reaction is allowed to proceed.
To record more reliable data about the extent to which the rate of a
given reaction depends on the concentration of a specific reactant, we
often look at the **initial rate of reaction** , which is the rate of
product formation (or reactant disappearance) that occurs directly after
the reactants have been mixed. In those first few seconds, we can assume
that the concentrations of each reactant are essentially equivalent to
the amounts that were originally added to the reaction mixture.
Additionally, if the presence of the product alters the rate of
reaction, this effect is minimized when there is little to no product in
the mixture, further simplifying our analysis of the data.

When studying the kinetics of a reaction, what do we measure? The
easiest parameter to look at is product formation. If we start at a
concentration of zero, we can measure the amount of product present
after a short period of time, and the concentration of product divided
by the time elapsed gives us the initial rate of reaction. Measuring the
disappearance of a reactant is also possible. However, the change in the
concentration of the product is often easier to measure, because it is a
much larger change based on percentage.

For example, in the generic reaction A → B, let's say we start with
1.000 M A and 0 M B. If we allow the reaction to proceed for a very
short period of time, we might have 0.998 M A and 0.002 M B. The
difference between 0 M and 0.002 M is generally easier to measure
accurately than the difference between 1.000 M and 0.998 M.

## Rate Laws {#18.html#x-ck12-UmF0ZSBMYXdz_1-vmu}

So far, we have been assuming that most reactions occur by a very simple
process, in which all the necessary reactants collide, and products are
formed if the collision is sufficiently energetic. However, most
reactions are much more complicated than that. Except for the most basic
reactions, several simpler steps, each of which involves a single
collision, are required to get from reactants to products. This sequence
of steps, known as the reaction mechanism, will be covered in the next
lesson.

We have also assumed that increasing the concentration of any reactant
will increase the overall rate of reaction. However, the extent to which
this is true, and whether it is true for all reactants, depends on the
reaction mechanism. What we can say is that the rate of reaction is
proportional to the concentration of each reactant raised to some
exponent. Mathematically, this can be expressed as follows for the
generic reaction A + B → C.

![Rate \\propto
\[A\]\^x\[B\]\^y](ck12_math_images_dir/880d20aeb86947a28a2139012f6558a7.png)

Alternatively, we can express this as an equation:

![Rate=k\[A\]\^x\[B\]\^y](ck12_math_images_dir/4dd388e441fc64305a325f8ae8735d12.png)

where k is a proportionality constant known as the **rate constant** .
In general, a larger rate constant is indicative of a faster reaction.

The exponents for an unknown reaction cannot be predicted simply by
looking at the chemical equation. Instead, they must be determined
experimentally by comparing initial rate data for multiple sets of
initial concentrations.

## Determining Rate Laws Experimentally {#18.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgUmF0ZSBMYXdzIEV4cGVyaW1lbnRhbGx5_1-ywj}

Consider the reaction between nitrogen monoxide gas and hydrogen gas to
form nitrogen gas and water vapor.

<dl id="x-ck12-pgf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-7tu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-mxr">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)} \\mathrm{+2H\_{2}}{(g)} \\mathrm{\\rightarrow
N\_{2}}{(g)}
\\mathrm{+2H\_2O}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/8a7b30bd1a77fa6634002d6ca3c408c9.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The rate law for this reaction will have the following form:

<dl id="x-ck12-r3k">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-46s">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lrp">
<dd>
![Rate=k\[\\text{NO}\]\^x\[\\text{H}\_2\]\^y](ck12_math_images_dir/bafc140e99a2578c3b7ee7016bcd4542.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In order to determine the exponents in this equation, the following data
were collected at a set temperature and pressure:

  Experiment   \[NO\] (M)   \[H ~2~ \] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
  ------------ ------------ ---------------- --------------------
  1            0.0050       0.0020           1.25 × 10 ^−5^
  2            0.010        0.0020           5.00 × 10 ^−5^
  3            0.010        0.0040           1.00 × 10 ^−4^

Notice that the starting concentrations of NO and H ~2~ were varied in a
specific way. In order to compare the rates of reaction and determine
the exponent associated with each reactant, the initial concentration of
each reactant must be changed while the other is held constant.

<span class="x-ck12-underline"> Comparing experiments 1 and 2 </span> :
the concentration of NO was doubled, while the concentration of H ~2~
was held constant. Doubling the concentration of NO quadrupled the
initial reaction rate (5.00 × 10 ^−5^ /1.25 × 10 ^−5^ = 4). Therefore,
the exponent associated with the concentration of NO must be 2. In other
words, Rate ∝ \[NO\] ^2^ . Because 2 ^2^ = 4, doubling the value of
\[NO\] increases the rate by a factor of four.

<span class="x-ck12-underline"> Comparing experiments 2 and 3 </span> :
the concentration of H ~2~ was doubled while the concentration of NO was
held constant. Doubling the concentration of H ~2~ doubled the initial
rate of the reaction (1.00 × 10 ^−4^ /5.00 × 10 ^−5^ = 2). Therefore,
the exponent associated with the concentration of H ~2~ is 1 (Rate ∝ \[H
~2~ \] ^1^ ). Because 2 ^1^ = 2, doubling the value of \[H ~2~ \] also
doubles the reaction rate.

The overall rate law incorporates both of these results into a single
equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-76k">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-04i">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-inf">
<dd>
![Rate=k\[\\text{NO}\]\^2\[\\text{H}\_2\]](ck12_math_images_dir/cda76b0d7fa28a5f96c750209e6c2981.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Note that exponents of 1 are generally not included, since \[A\] ^1^ =
\[A\]. Based on the exponents associated with each concentration, we
would say that this reaction is **second-order** with respect to NO and
**first-order** with respect to H ~2~ . The overall reaction order is
the sum of the individual reaction orders, or the sum of all exponents
in the rate law. You can see that this would be a third-order reaction
overall.

Additionally, now that we know the form of the rate law, we can plug in
data from any of the experiments to determine the value of k for this
reaction under the conditions (temperature, pressure, etc.) at which the
data was measured. Using the data from experiment 1:

![Rate&=k\[\\text{NO}\]\^2\[\\text{H}\_2\] \\\\\\1.25 \\times 10\^{-5}
\\ \\frac{\\text{M}}{\\text{s}}&=k\[0.0050 \\ \\text{M}\]\^2\[0.0020 \\
\\text{M}\] \\\\\\k&=250 \\ \\frac{1}{\\text{M}\^2 \\cdot
\\text{s}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3abdb46d081648a92a69679289e3a112.png)

Let's consider another hypothetical reaction of the form A + B → C + D.
Under a certain set of conditions, the following data were collected:

  Experiment   \[A\] (M)   \[B\] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
  ------------ ----------- ----------- --------------------
  1            0.015       0.025       0.112
  2            0.030       0.025       0.224
  3            0.030       0.050       0.224

Comparing experiments 1 and 2, we see that doubling the concentration of
A while holding \[B\] constant doubles the rate. Therefore, this
reaction is first-order with respect to A (Rate ∝ \[A\] ^1^ ). Plugging
this into our generic rate law, we get the following:

![Rate&=k\[A\]\^x\[B\]\^y \\\\\\Rate&=k\[A\]\^1\[B\]\^y
\\\\\\Rate&=k\[A\]\[B\]\^y](ck12_math_images_dir/0bf50aa5eabd1f94d7c516bbc544c49c.png)

Next, we can compare experiments 2 and 3, in which \[A\] is constant but
\[B\] is doubled. This change *does not affect* the overall reaction
rate. We can conclude that the rate of the reaction is independent of
the concentration of reactant B. How can we express this in terms of the
exponents of the rate law? Recall that any value raised to the 0th power
is equal to 1 ( *x* ^0^ = 1). To completely remove a concentration from
the rate law, we could set its exponent equal to zero:

![Rate&=k\[A\]\[B\]\^0 \\\\\\Rate&=k\[A\] \\times 1
\\\\\\Rate&=k\[A\]](ck12_math_images_dir/5b39bcf23b016cf24a2625702913de6c.png)

We say that this reaction is **zero-order** with respect to reactant B.
Overall, this is a first-order reaction.

Although other exponents are possible, most reactions are zero-, first-,
or second-order with respect to each reactant. Again, the values of the
exponents generally cannot be predicted and must be determined
experimentally.

## Lesson Summary {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-2cy}

-   The initial rate of reaction is the rate at which the reaction
    proceeds directly after mixing the reactants. At this point, the
    concentrations of the reactants have not changed appreciably and the
    concentrations of the products are negligible.
-   The rate law for a given reaction expresses the reaction rate as the
    product of a rate constant and the concentration of each reactant
    raised to some exponent.
-   The exponents in a rate law, referred to as the order of each
    reactant, must be determined experimentally, usually by comparing
    initial rates for multiple combinations of starting concentrations.

## Lesson Review Questions {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-nrv}

### Reviewing Concepts {#18.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz_1-dyd}

1.  What is the advantage of measuring the initial rate of reaction?
2.  What does it mean if a reaction is second-order with respect to a
    given reactant?
3.  What does it mean if a reaction is first-order with respect to a
    given reactant?
4.  What does it mean if a reaction is zero-order with respect to a
    given reactant?

### Problems {#18.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM._1-6q7}

1.  A generic reaction is found to have the following experimental rate
    law: ![Rate =
    k\[A\]\[B\]](ck12_math_images_dir/6e1319268753a79d4b5f288ba49d0a34.png) .
    What will happen to the rate of reaction if the concentration of A
    is tripled?
2.  Another reaction has the following rate law: ![Rate =
    k\[A\]\[B\]\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/73af9d30753beff384534cd699eb04a2.png) .
    What will happen to the rate of reaction if the concentration of B
    is doubled?
3.  Consider the generic reaction A + B → products. For each set of data
    given below, determine the reaction order with respect to each
    reactant and write the experimental rate law.
    1.  
          Experiment   \[A\] (M)   \[B\] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
          ------------ ----------- ----------- --------------------
          1            0.023       0.014       0.011
          2            0.046       0.014       0.044
          3            0.023       0.028       0.011

    2.  
          Experiment   \[A\] (M)   \[B\] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
          ------------ ----------- ----------- --------------------
          1            0.017       0.021       0.023
          2            0.034       0.021       0.023
          3            0.017       0.042       0.046

    3.  
          Experiment   \[A\] (M)   \[B\] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
          ------------ ----------- ----------- --------------------
          1            0.023       0.017       0.023
          2            0.046       0.017       0.046
          3            0.023       0.034       0.092

4.  For one reaction of the type A + B → products, the reaction is
    first-order with respect to A and zero-order with respect to B. Fill
    in the missing values in the following **Table**
    [below](#18.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6UHJvYjQ.) .

  Experiment   \[A\] (M)   \[B\] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
  ------------ ----------- ----------- --------------------
  1            0.106       0.012       0.355
  2            ?           0.012       0.710
  3            0.212       0.036       ?

5.  For another reaction of the type A + B → products, the reaction is
    second-order with respect to both A and B. Fill in the missing
    values in the following **Table**
    [below](#18.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6UHJvYjU.) .

  Experiment   \[A\] (M)   \[B\] (M)   Initial Rate (M/s)
  ------------ ----------- ----------- --------------------
  1            0.106       0.012       0.355
  2            0.212       0.012       ?
  3            0.212       0.036       ?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#18.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-jdt}

-   Reaction order:
    [http://www.files.chem.vt.edu/RVGS/ACT/notes/rxn\_order.html](rxn_order.html)
-   Reaction order graphing:
    [http://chem.usm.my/LECTURER/KFT%20131%20sitimariam/Topic\_8.pdf](Topic_8.pdf)

## Points to Consider {#18.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-5c4}

How would the rate of reaction be calculated for a multiple step
process?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686151] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686152] -->

# Reaction Mechanisms {#18.html#x-ck12-UmVhY3Rpb24gTWVjaGFuaXNtcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-a8n}

-   Define and give examples of elementary steps, and be able to
    identify the molecularity of each step.
-   Define and give examples of reaction mechanisms.
-   Predict the rate law for a given elementary step.
-   Evaluate validity of reaction mechanisms based on rate law data.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-gfn}

-   **elementary step** : One step in a series of simple reactions that
    show the progress of a reaction at the molecular level.
-   **reaction mechanism** : The sequence of elementary steps that
    together comprise an entire chemical reaction.
-   **intermediate** : A species that appears in the mechanism of a
    reaction but not in the overall balanced equation.
-   **molecularity** : The total number of reactant molecules in an
    elementary step.
-   **bimolecular reaction** : A reaction in which two reacting
    molecules are present as reactants in an elementary step.
-   **unimolecular reaction** : A reaction in which one molecule is
    present as a reactant in an elementary step.
-   **termolecular reaction** : A reaction in which three reacting
    molecules in an elementary step.
-   **rate-determining step** : The slowest elementary step in the
    reaction mechanism.

## Check Your Understanding {#18.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-jjm}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#18.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._2-luk}

-   How do we measure reaction rate?
-   What does the order of a reaction tell us?

## Elementary Steps {#18.html#x-ck12-RWxlbWVudGFyeSBTdGVwcw.._2-5sp}

The overall balanced equation for a chemical reaction does not always
tell us how a reaction actually proceeds. In many cases, the overall
reaction takes place in a series of small steps. An **elementary step**
(or elementary reaction) is one step in a series of simple reactions
that show the progress of a reaction at the molecular level. In terms of
collision theory, each elementary step corresponds to a single
collision. A **reaction mechanism** is the sequence of elementary steps
that together comprise an entire chemical reaction. As an analogy,
consider the route that you might take while driving to the grocery
store. That route may consist of several turns, similar to the
elementary steps. The overall reaction specifies only the beginning
point (your house) and the final destination (the store), with no
information about the specifics in between.

Understanding the mechanism of a reaction can be very useful, because
this knowledge often gives us insights into how to improve the reaction,
get better yields, or make the reaction proceed more rapidly.
Additionally, many seemingly different reactions often have very similar
reaction mechanisms. Understanding the types of elementary steps that
are common to many different chemical species allows us to make
predictions about the reactivity patterns of unknown compounds.

The reaction mechanism concept can be illustrated by the reaction
between nitrogen monoxide and oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide:

<dl id="x-ck12-8q0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-nbk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ouc">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)} \\mathrm{+O\_{2}}{(g)} \\mathrm{\\rightarrow
2NO\_{2}}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/dc20380c64b9966ee5e2fa9151ee66fb.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
It may seem as though this reaction would occur as the result of a
collision between two NO molecules and one O ~2~ molecule. However, a
careful analysis of the reaction has detected the presence of N ~2~ O
~2~ during the reaction. A proposed mechanism for this reaction consists
of two elementary steps:

<dl id="x-ck12-NzI4ODQ0ZWY2YzM1NzA2N2M4M2ExZDc5YTk5ZmMyYjg.-mkw">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQyMWZmNTBlZGUzZDM1MGM4MzZiNmE5ZjZiZTg5NjM.-3x4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQyMWZmNTBlZGUzZDM1MGM4MzZiNmE5ZjZiZTg5NjM.-t4i">
<dd>
Step 1: ![\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)} \\mathrm{\\rightarrow
N\_2O\_2}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/306ca1376f28a6d0f548b3c27dff3090.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDg0YTNlOTYyYzU0YTk0NDY1ODk2YTBmYTg0YmUzZmM.-dpi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDg0YTNlOTYyYzU0YTk0NDY1ODk2YTBmYTg0YmUzZmM.-peg">
<dd>
Step 2: ![\\mathrm{N\_2O\_2}{(g)} \\mathrm{+O\_2}{(g)}
\\mathrm{\\rightarrow
2NO\_2}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/ce67b33e48c704b86c4fa2c9ef9cdaef.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In the first step, two molecules of NO collide to form a molecule of N
~2~ O ~2~ . In the second step, that molecule of N ~2~ O ~2~ collides
with a molecule of O ~2~ to produce two molecules of NO ~2~ . The
overall chemical reaction is the sum of the two elementary steps:

![\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)} & \\rightarrow \\cancel{\\mathrm{N\_2O\_2}{(g)}}
\\\\\\\\cancel{\\mathrm{N\_2O\_2}{(g)}}+\\mathrm{O\_2}{(g)} &
\\rightarrow \\mathrm{2NO\_2}{(g)}
\\\\\\\\hline\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)}+\\mathrm{O\_2}{(g)} & \\rightarrow
\\mathrm{2NO\_2}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/b374d279b8a56e0f75b098f960d2b6dc.png)

The N ~2~ O ~2~ molecule is not part of the overall reaction. It was
produced in the first elementary step, then reacts in the second
elementary step. An **intermediate** is a species that appears in the
mechanism of a reaction but not in the overall balanced equation. An
intermediate is always formed in an earlier step of the mechanism and
then consumed in a later step.

### Molecularity {#18.html#x-ck12-TW9sZWN1bGFyaXR5_2-ays}

The **molecularity** of an elementary step is the total number of
reactant molecules in that step. In both steps of the reaction mechanism
shown above, two reactant molecules collide with one another. These are
both **bimolecular reactions** . Notice that the colliding molecules may
be the same (as in step 1 above) or different (as in step 2 above).

A **unimolecular reaction** is one in which only one molecule is present
as a reactant. If we think about this in terms of collision theory, we
would expect a unimolecular reaction to take place when the reactant
molecule collides with either the wall of the container or molecules of
solvent. The substance with which the reactant collides does not
participate in the reaction, but it provides the necessary energy to
cause whatever rearrangement or bond breakage is required for the given
step.

A **termolecular reaction** involves three reacting molecules in one
elementary step. Termolecular steps are relatively rare, because they
require the simultaneous collision of three molecules with sufficient
energy and the correct orientation to form an activated complex, which
is an extremely unlikely event. When termolecular reactions do occur,
they tend to be very slow. The vast majority of elementary steps are
either unimolecular or bimolecular.

## Rate Laws and Mechanisms {#18.html#x-ck12-UmF0ZSBMYXdzIGFuZCBNZWNoYW5pc21z_2-0d2}

In general, we cannot predict the rate law for a chemical reaction by
looking at its balanced equation, because the rate law for a multi-step
reaction depends on the reaction mechanism. In contrast, we *can*
predict the rate law for an elementary step. Consider the following
unimolecular step:

<dl id="x-ck12-x7w">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-orl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-c5a">
<dd>
![\\text{A} \\to
products](ck12_math_images_dir/3d6c01a96013d86e2a83624f7021a2fb.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because it occurs in a single elementary step, the rate of product
formation will increase linearly with the concentration of A, making the
rate of this reaction first-order with respect to A.

<dl id="x-ck12-vbh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-nde">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ya0">
<dd>
![Rate=k\[\\text{A}\]](ck12_math_images_dir/13f484e622443dc41766d8ff79e58959.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
A bimolecular elementary step could be one of two types. Either a
molecule of A could react with a molecule of B or two molecules of A
could react with each other. In either case, the rate of reaction
depends on how frequently the collisions between reactant molecules
occur.

![\\mathrm{A+B} & \\rightarrow \\mathrm{products} & &
\\mathrm{rate=k\[A\]\[B\]} \\\\\\\\mathrm{2A} & \\rightarrow
\\mathrm{products} & &
\\mathrm{rate=k\[A\]\^2}](ck12_math_images_dir/0a01d7bc7ba4c383383cb230bff11256.png)

The reaction order for each reactant in an elementary step is equal to
its stoichiometric coefficient in the equation for that step. In the
first equation above, each coefficient is a 1, and so the reaction is
first-order with respect to A and first-order with respect to B. In the
second equation, the coefficient of 2 means the reaction is second-order
with respect to A.

### Rate-Determining Steps {#18.html#x-ck12-UmF0ZS1EZXRlcm1pbmluZyBTdGVwcw.._2-nsi}

The determination of a reaction mechanism can only be made in the
laboratory. When a reaction occurs in a sequence of elementary steps,
the overall reaction rate is governed by whichever one of those steps is
the slowest. The **rate-determining step** is the slowest step in the
reaction mechanism. To get an idea of how one step is rate-determining,
imagine driving on a one-lane road where it is not possible to pass
another vehicle. The rate of flow of traffic on such a road would be
dictated by whatever car is traveling at the lowest speed.

Consider the reaction mechanism presented in the previous section:

<dl id="x-ck12-NzI4ODQ0ZWY2YzM1NzA2N2M4M2ExZDc5YTk5ZmMyYjg.-lu9">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQyMWZmNTBlZGUzZDM1MGM4MzZiNmE5ZjZiZTg5NjM.-bjf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQyMWZmNTBlZGUzZDM1MGM4MzZiNmE5ZjZiZTg5NjM.-51e">
<dd>
Step 1: ![\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)} \\mathrm{\\rightarrow
N\_2O\_2}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/306ca1376f28a6d0f548b3c27dff3090.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDg0YTNlOTYyYzU0YTk0NDY1ODk2YTBmYTg0YmUzZmM.-mdv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDg0YTNlOTYyYzU0YTk0NDY1ODk2YTBmYTg0YmUzZmM.-njl">
<dd>
Step 2: ![\\mathrm{N\_2O\_2}{(g)} \\mathrm{+O\_2}{(g)}
\\mathrm{\\rightarrow
2NO\_2}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/ce67b33e48c704b86c4fa2c9ef9cdaef.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Let's say that the first step is much slower than the second step. If
this is true, the rate of the overall reaction would be completely
determined by the speed at which the first elementary step proceeds. As
soon as it is formed, the N ~2~ O ~2~ intermediate would immediately be
consumed by the (much faster) second step.

What is the rate of the first step? Because it is an elementary step, we
can predict its rate law based on the balanced equation. An elementary
step in which the reactants consist of two molecules of NO(g) would have
the following rate law:

<dl id="x-ck12-8bx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ecj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-khc">
<dd>
![Rate=k\[\\text{NO}\]\^2](ck12_math_images_dir/85bcd678d0bea0d0ac9e0049c1eae7f7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If we have correctly identified the mechanism of this reaction and
chosen the correct rate-determining step, this will also be the rate of
the overall reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-aip">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-a2v">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-9x6">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2NO}{(g)} \\mathrm{+O\_{2}}{(g)} \\mathrm{\\rightarrow
2NO\_{2}}{(g)}](ck12_math_images_dir/dc20380c64b9966ee5e2fa9151ee66fb.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If the experimentally determined rate law for this reaction does not
match the one predicted by the proposed mechanism, then the mechanism
(or the choice of rate-determining step) is incorrect. However, if the
two rate laws do match, we cannot necessarily say that we have found the
correct mechanism, because there is always more than one mechanism that
can be proposed for any given rate law. Thus, the experimentally
determined rate law can invalidate or provide support for a proposed
mechanism, but it cannot prove that the mechanism is correct.

In general, the rate law for a mechanism can be predicted based on the
form of the rate-determining step. However, the analysis gets more
complicated when a step other than the first step is rate-determining.
This is due to the fact that intermediates in a reaction are not
directly included in the rate law. For the purposes of this book, you
will not be required to predict the rate law for any multi-step
reactions unless the first step is the rate-determining step.

## Lesson Summary {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-qk3}

-   A reaction mechanism describes the series of elementary steps by
    which the reactants are transformed into the products.
-   The number of reactant molecules in an elementary step is referred
    to as its molecularity. The vast majority of elementary steps are
    unimolecular or bimolecular.
-   Unlike the rate law for a multi-step reaction, the rate law of an
    elementary step can be predicted from its balanced equation.
-   The rate-limiting step is the slowest step in a mechanism. The rate
    of the overall reaction is directly dependent on the speed of the
    rate-determining step.
-   The experimentally determined rate law can rule out incorrect
    mechanisms but cannot prove that a mechanism is correct.

## Lesson Review Questions {#18.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-hsf}

1.  Describe an elementary step as it relates to collision theory.
2.  How can the molecularity of an elementary step be determined?
3.  Why must all reactions contain a rate-determining step?
4.  Which of the following elementary steps is bimolecular?
    1.  A → C + D
    2.  A + B → 2C + D
    3.  2A + B → 2C

5.  The rate law for the reaction 2A + B → Products is:
    ![Rate=k\[A\]\[B\]](ck12_math_images_dir/d726b888b7e96764abc7caa6c44db5ea.png) .
    Which reaction mechanism is consistent with this information?
    1.  ![A + B & \\rightarrow AB && (slow) \\\\\\AB + A & \\rightarrow
        Products
        && (fast)](ck12_math_images_dir/2640d3e847aa9faf22e5bd8e227b36ad.png)
    2.  ![A + A & \\rightarrow A\_2 && (slow) \\\\\\A\_2 + B &
        \\rightarrow Products
        && (fast)](ck12_math_images_dir/a84c0af2c830f75cffcc853b8794acec.png)
    3.  ![A + B & \\rightarrow AB && (fast) \\\\\\AB + A & \\rightarrow
        Products
        && (slow)](ck12_math_images_dir/f0b3fb56b17a0b0be5cb4a6075a53dfc.png)
    4.  ![A + A & \\rightarrow A\_2 && (fast) \\\\\\A\_2 + B &
        \\rightarrow Products
        && (slow)](ck12_math_images_dir/c8cd03aeb98103e950f29eb7217cb1b1.png)

6.  The following three-step mechanism is proposed for the reaction
    between NO and H ~2~ : ![& \\text{NO}+\\text{NO}\\rightarrow
    \\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_2 && (fast) \\\\\\&
    \\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_2+\\text{H}\_2\\rightarrow
    \\text{N}\_2\\text{O}+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O} && (slow) \\\\\\&
    \\text{N}\_2\\text{O}+\\text{H}\_2\\rightarrow
    \\text{N}\_2+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}
    && (fast)](ck12_math_images_dir/8740b92ed31ac9f0640e1eedf46210ea.png)
    1.  What is the rate determining step?
    2.  Write the balanced equation for the overall reaction.
    3.  Are there any intermediates? if so, state what they are.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#18.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-9xk}

-   Reaction mechanisms:
    [http://www.sparknotes.com/chemistry/kinetics/mechanisms/section1.html](section1.html)
-   More reaction mechanisms:
    [http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu/Physical\_Chemistry/Kinetics/Rate\_Laws/Reactions/Reaction\_Mechanisms](Reaction_Mechanisms)
-   Reaction mechanism video:
    [http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu/Physical\_Chemistry/Kinetics/Rate\_Laws/Reactions/Reaction\_Mechanisms](Reaction_Mechanisms)

## Points to Consider {#18.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-yvo}

Do reactions only go in one direction? Can reverse reactions occur?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686152] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#18.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-trz}

1.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
2.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
3.  Peter Lai. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
4.  User:SameerKhan/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Harbor\_Fwy\_Traffic.jpg](File:Harbor_Fwy_Traffic.jpg) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Sadi\_Carnot/Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Molecular-collisions.jpg](File:Molecular-collisions.jpg) .
    Public Domain
6.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
7.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
8.  Michael Schmid.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hydrogenation\_on\_catalyst.png](File:Hydrogenation_on_catalyst.png) .
    CC BY 1.0
9.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0

<span id="19.html"></span>

# Chemical Equilibrium {#19.html#x-ck12-Q2hlbWljYWwgRXF1aWxpYnJpdW0.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_19_files/20151009235352847169.jpeg)
</span>

When dissolved in water, cobalt chloride produces a reddish-pink
solution. The introduction of additional chloride ions causes a shift
from a fully hydrated cobalt cation (\[Co(H ~2~ O) ~6~ \] ^2+^ (aq)) to
a new complex (\[CoCl ~4~ \] ^2–^ (aq)). This is accompanied by a change
in color, from reddish-pink to blue. The green solution shown in the
figure above is a third type of cobalt complex. The equilibrium between
the two complexes is sensitive not only to the concentration of the
chloride ion, but also to the temperature. Increasing the temperature
causes a shift from the pink to the blue species, and lowering the
temperature reverses this color change.

So far, we have generally assumed that the reactants in a chemical
reaction are irreversibly transformed into products. However, many
chemical reactions are reversible, meaning that it is also possible for
the reaction to go "backwards". When both the forward and reverse
reactions can proceed at a reasonable rate, a state of equilibrium is
eventually reached, in which both reactions are occurring at the same
rate and no net change is made to the amounts of reactants or products.
In this chapter, we will look at the factors that govern chemical
equilibria.

^User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia\\ Commons.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cobalt\_chloride\_equilibrium.JPG.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686154] -->

# The Nature of Chemical Equilibrium {#19.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE5hdHVyZSBvZiBDaGVtaWNhbCBFcXVpbGlicml1bQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-iqf}

-   Define chemical equilibrium in terms of reaction rates.
-   Define equilibrium constant.
-   Be able to write an equilibrium constant expression for a chemical
    reaction using the law of mass action.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-ro3}

-   **irreversible process** : A chemical reaction that can only be run
    in the forward direction; that is, the products do not react to form
    the reactants.
-   **chemical equilibrium** : The state in which the rate of the
    forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction.
-   **equilibrium constant** : The ratio of the rate constant of the
    forward reaction and the rate constant of the reverse reaction.
-   **equilibrium constant expression** : The ratio of the product
    concentrations and the reactant concentrations, raised to their
    respective exponents.
-   **law of mass action** : States that for any reaction at
    equilibrium, the ratio of product concentrations to reactant
    concentrations (along with the appropriate exponents) is equal to
    a constant.

## Check Your Understanding {#19.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-jlm}

1.  Can you give an example of a chemical process that is reversible?
2.  Can you think of a chemical process that is not reversible, or that
    would be very difficult to reverse?

## Introduction {#19.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-fkg}

We have not always known that some chemical processes are reversible. In
fact, not long ago, it was widely thought that chemical processes were
irreversible. For instance, the dissolving of table salt into water was
viewed as a unidirectional process; once the salt dissolved, it could
not be undissolved from the solution. Dissolution reactions were
therefore viewed as **irreversible processes** . However, in the early
1800s, the Frenchman Claude Lois Berthollet (1748-1822) observed a
dissolution reaction that appeared to be reversible.

<div
id="19.html#x-ck12-YjZjYjhjYTEzNmVkNDNiNDc0NjI1YjJjMTlhNTZjYzM.-rxd"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Photogravure by H. Liffart, Berlin; scanned, image processed, and uploaded by Armin K&#252;belbeck" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Claude_Louis_Berthollet_01.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_19_files/20151009235353310151.jpeg)

**Figure 19.1**

</div>

Berthollet was a chemist hired by Napoleon to travel to Egypt during
what later became known as the Battle of the Pyramids (1798). One day,
Berthollet observed crystals of sodium carbonate (also known as trona)
that had formed along one of the ponds he was visiting.

<div
id="19.html#x-ck12-MWQ5OGVkZjQ4MGYyNTdkZmFhZjg2NWY1ZTc1MjZiNzg.-54d"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Alisha Vargas" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/alishav/3953941345/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_19_files/20151009235353562378.jpeg)

**Figure 19.2**

</div>

Trona is a mineral composed of hydrated sodium carbonate, Na ~2~ CO ~3~
•10H ~2~ O, that is often found crystallized with other salts.
Berthollet was struck by this occurrence, because the double
displacement reaction that often occurred in the salt-rich natron ponds
was expected to produce only calcium carbonate and sodium chloride, not
sodium carbonate.

![\\text{Na}\_2\\text{CO}\_{3(aq)}+\\text{CaCl}\_{2(aq)}\\rightarrow
\\text{CaCO}\_{3(s)}+2\\text{NaCl}\_{(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/3a95589343334d93f6460eacf57b1fe7.png)

Berthollet suggested that the presence of Na ~2~ CO ~3~ meant that this
double displacement reaction was actually reversible.

![\\text{Na}\_2\\text{CO}\_{3(aq)}+\\text{CaCl}\_{2(aq)}
\\rightleftarrows
\\text{CaCO}\_{3(s)}+2\\text{NaCl}\_{(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/91226406b60579a44ed64b71a6bc40fc.png)

The reversibility of this reaction would explain how the reactants and
products could all be present at the same time.

## Reversible Reactions {#19.html#x-ck12-UmV2ZXJzaWJsZSBSZWFjdGlvbnM.-dvy}

### Equilibrium in Chemical Reactions {#19.html#x-ck12-RXF1aWxpYnJpdW0gaW4gQ2hlbWljYWwgUmVhY3Rpb25z-gh9}

Consider the following generic chemical equation:

![A+B\\rightleftarrows
C+D](ck12_math_images_dir/03e1c1c1ad462f31cd67f93736d3f072.png)

At the beginning of the reaction, only the reactants A and B are
present. Recall that over the course of a reaction, the reaction rate
slows down. This is because the rate depends on the concentrations of
one or more reactants. As the reactants are used up, their
concentrations drop, thus decreasing the reaction rate.

At the same time, the concentrations of the products, C and D, are
increasing from their initial concentrations of zero. For the reverse
reaction, C and D are the reactants, so the rate of the reverse reaction
will increase as more C and D are present. As the reaction progresses,
the rate of the forward reaction decreases, and the rate of the reverse
reaction increases. Eventually, these two rates will be equal. In other
words, the rate at which the products are formed is equal to the rate at
which they are consumed, so no net change is taking place. A reaction
has reached **chemical equilibrium** when the rate of the forward
reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction.

<div
id="19.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-tfe"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_19_files/20151009235353682511.png)

**Figure 19.3**

</div>

After equilibrium has been reached, the concentrations of all reaction
components will remain constant unless a change is made to the system.
Because the concentrations are no longer changing, it may appear that
the reaction has "stopped." This is incorrect; both the forward and
reverse reactions are still going on, even at equilibrium. However,
because the two reactions are proceeding at the same rate, no net change
is observed.

## The Equilibrium Constant (K ~eq~ ) {#19.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEVxdWlsaWJyaXVtIENvbnN0YW50IChL-k0j}

### The Law of Mass Action {#19.html#x-ck12-VGhlIExhdyBvZiBNYXNzIEFjdGlvbg..-qfd}

Consider again a generic reversible reaction in which reactants A and B
react to form products C and D. This equilibrium is shown below, where
the lower case letters represent the coefficients of each substance.

![aA+bB \\rightleftarrows
cC+dD](ck12_math_images_dir/9a6685583f9396a3bf6b7a1403823ed7.png)

Let's assume that this reaction occurs by a single elementary step. If
that were the case, the rate law for the forward reaction would have the
following form:

![Rate\_{forward}=k\_f\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b](ck12_math_images_dir/dcbcf8752918a9bc1569733b0600c359.png)

where the concentrations of each reactant, indicated by the square
brackets around the formula, are measured in molarity units (mol/L).

Similarly, the rate law for the reverse reaction can be written using
the concentrations of C and D (the reactants for the reverse process):

![Rate\_{reverse}=k\_r\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d](ck12_math_images_dir/f865489e47c7529cde8589bae0a13fe6.png)

In a reaction at equilibrium, the rate of the forward reaction equals
the rate of the reverse reaction. Mathematically, this means the
following:

![Rate\_{forward}&=Rate\_{reverse} \\\\\\k\_f\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b
&=k\_r\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d \\\\\\\\frac{k\_f}{k\_r}
&=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/40bc98e011c010e005732774f420ab77.png)

The ratio of the two rate constants would just be another constant. This
new constant, written as K ~eq~ , K ~c~ , or simply K, is known as the
**equilibrium constant** for this reaction. The **equilibrium constant
expression** has the following form:

![K\_{eq}=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/e4af654f48331d2dfe83b82336c031f0.png)

We derived this expression based on reactions that occur by a single
elementary step. However, it turns out that the equilibrium constant
expression is valid for any reaction, even those that occur by a
multi-step mechanism. For any reaction at equilibrium, the ratio of
product concentrations to reactant concentrations (along with the
appropriate exponents) is equal to a constant. This is known as the
**law of mass action** .

**Example 19.1**

Write the equilibrium constant expression for the following reaction:

![2\\text{SO}\_3(g)\\rightleftarrows
2\\text{SO}\_2(g)+\\text{O}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/0295096ec0d5c12eacdbaa88f7aa4d30.png)

*Answer:*

The products go in the numerator, and the reactant goes in the
denominator. Any component that has a coefficient in the balanced
equation is raised to that power in the equilibrium constant expression.

![K\_{eq}=\\frac{\[\\text{SO}\_2\]\^2\[\\text{O}\_2\]}{\[\\text{SO}\_3\]\^2}](ck12_math_images_dir/8c1df27b641625f991c98aaad5fcfab8.png)

### Heterogeneous Equilibria {#19.html#x-ck12-SGV0ZXJvZ2VuZW91cyBFcXVpbGlicmlh-08t}

So far, we have been assuming that a decrease in the amount of a
reactant or product also decreases its concentration. This is true for
gases, where the concentration is equal to the number of moles divided
by the volume of the container. Because the container generally does not
change size over the course of the reaction, fewer moles of gas means a
lower concentration. This is also true for substances that are dissolved
in water or another solvent. Assuming the volume of the solvent does not
change appreciably during the reaction, fewer moles of solute in the
same amount of solvent results in a lower concentration.

However, for solid or liquid reaction components, this is not
necessarily true. Consider the following reaction:

![\\text{NH}\_4\\text{CO}\_2\\text{NH}\_2(s)\\rightleftarrows
2\\text{NH}\_3(g)+\\text{CO}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/a02652b6848732ba93485fb5b1094a70.png)

The "concentration" of a solid is essentially another way of measuring
its density. A certain number of moles are present for a given volume of
the solid, and this value does not depend on how much of the solid is
present. As the reaction proceeds, the amount of solid reactant will
decrease, but so will the volume it occupies. A similar argument can be
made for liquids. As a result, the concentrations of solids and liquids
are essentially constant over the course of a reaction.

Now, let's look at the equilibrium constant expression that could be
generated for this reaction. Following the rules that we have given so
far, it would take the following form:

![K\_{eq}=\\frac{\[\\text{NH}\_3\]\^2\[\\text{CO}\_2\]}{\[\\text{NH}\_4\\text{CO}\_2\\text{NH}\_2\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/9792db29f31e512e0f7906f918287957.png)

However, because the concentration of solid ammonium carbamate is
constant during the reaction, we could potentially simplify this
expression as follows:

![(K\_{eq})\[\\text{NH}\_4\\text{CO}\_2\\text{NH}\_2\]&=\[\\text{NH}\_3\]\^2\[\\text{CO}\_2\]
\\\\\\K'\_{eq}=\[\\text{NH}\_3\]\^2\[\\text{CO}\_2\]](ck12_math_images_dir/a6d57f3fc9e951ee8be05bc23df206a9.png)

where K' ~eq~ is the product of the original equilibrium constant and
the constant concentration of the solid reactant. By convention, the
simpler form is used by chemists. Whenever solid or liquid reactants or
products are part of a chemical reaction, their concentrations are *not*
included in the equilibrium constant expression, and it is understood
that the constant concentration of the missing reaction components is
incorporated into the value of any measured equilibrium constants.

**Example 19.2**

Write the equilibrium constant expression for the following reaction:

![2\\text{Mg}(s)+\\text{O}\_2(g) \\rightleftarrows
2\\text{MgO}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/90cfca212c6fdb4ce6e9e6726e59571c.png)

*Answer:*

Because both Mg and MgO are present as solids, they are not included in
the equilibrium constant expression. The only remaining component is
oxygen gas. Because oxygen is a reactant, it will appear in the
denominator.

![K\_{eq}=\\frac{1}{\[\\text{O}\_2\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/3da3ac93b2c76fdcee6502464f3af44a.png)

### Concentration vs. Partial Pressure {#19.html#x-ck12-Q29uY2VudHJhdGlvbiB2cy4gUGFydGlhbCBQcmVzc3VyZQ..-vug}

Let's take a look at one way in which the ideal gas law can be
rearranged. We are most familiar with the following form:

![PV=nRT](ck12_math_images_dir/fb2df3ecf87eaa43f2bdf8fd25a59ab0.png)

Dividing both sides by volume and rearranging the variables, we could
also write this law as follows:

![P=(RT)(\\frac{n}{V})](ck12_math_images_dir/06ae3345be480448c594aa92ff35b5f5.png)

What is the significance of this? Take a look at the fraction on the
right. We are dividing the amount of gas (in moles) by the volume (in
liters). The fraction n/V is simply the concentration of the gas. At a
given temperature, the partial pressure of any gas is directly
proportional to its concentration. Because of this, we can write an
alternate equilibrium constant expression in which partial pressures are
used in place of concentrations. The pressure-based equilibrium
constant, indicated by the abbreviation K ~p~ , can be written as
follows for a generic reaction in which all components are present in
the gas state:

![aA(g)+bB(g) & \\rightleftarrows cC(g) + dD(g) \\\\\\K\_p &=\\frac
{(P\_C)\^c(P\_D)\^d}{(P\_A)\^a(P\_B)\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/5569df18c2d93d32c7137b3de8020e6a.png)

For reactions that include solids or liquids in addition to gases, those
components are left out of the equilibrium constant expression, just as
they are for a concentration-based equilibrium constant. For reactions
that include both gases and aqueous components, the K ~p~ form of the
equilibrium constant is generally not used.

**Example Problem 19.3**

Write the pressure-based equilibrium constant expression (K ~p~ ) for
the following reaction:

![2\\text{O}\_3(g) \\rightleftarrows
3\\text{O}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/b857623f3c277ac99bda5479249abb1b.png)

*Answer:*

The process here is exactly the same as for a normal equilibrium
constant expression, except that we are using partial pressures instead
of concentrations. Reactants go in the denominator, and products go in
the numerator. Each component is raised to an exponent that is equal to
its coefficient in the balanced equation.

![K\_p=\\frac{(P\_{\\text{O}\_2})\^3}{(P\_{\\text{O}\_3})\^2}](ck12_math_images_dir/5e4285ff9cd24dfe471a8b9e73cab44a.png)

### Converting Between K ~c~ and K ~p~ {#19.html#x-ck12-Q29udmVydGluZyBCZXR3ZWVuIEs.-8ba}

For a gaseous substance, the conversion factor between concentration and
partial pressure can be derived from the ideal gas law:

![P\_AV&=n\_ART \\\\\\P\_A&=(\\frac{n\_A}{V})(RT)
\\\\\\P\_A&=\[A\](RT)](ck12_math_images_dir/5a168e97c967ef05d65e92df50721e3e.png)

where \[A\] is the molar concentration of A. Let's look again at the
generic expression for K ~p~ :

![aA(g)+bB(g) & \\rightleftarrows cC(g) + dD(g) \\\\\\K\_p&=\\frac
{(P\_C)\^c(P\_D)\^d}{(P\_A)\^a(P\_B)\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/8d33bffe12dd0e4e13552970fdf27ecf.png)

If we substitute in concentrations for each of the partial pressures, we
would get the following:

![K\_p&=\\frac{(\[C\](RT))\^c(\[D\](RT))\^d}{(\[A\](RT))\^a(\[B\](RT))\^b}
\\\\\\K\_p&=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b} \\times
\\frac{(RT)\^c(RT)\^d}{(RT)\^a(RT)\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/258a0f387041e85cc8278aad1b2371f7.png)

The fraction on the left is simply the generic expression for K ~c~ .
Additionally, the exponents in the fraction on the right can be
manipulated as follows:

![K\_p=K\_c(RT)\^{(c+d)-(a+b)}](ck12_math_images_dir/5832075359a234d4b152d1a7b8fd8395.png)

The exponent
![(c+d)-(a+b)](ck12_math_images_dir/ff3d269fbfb45582ea064db19c3a8eb4.png)
is the sum of the stoichiometric coefficients for the gaseous products
minus the sum of the coefficients for the gaseous reactants. This value
is sometimes abbreviated as Δn. Note that Δn can be a negative or
positive number. Using this abbreviation, the conversion factor between
K ~p~ and K ~c~ can be written as follows:

![K\_p=K\_c(RT)\^{\\Delta
n}](ck12_math_images_dir/b1e2dffee14cdb9716c539b3466c6784.png)

## Lesson Summary {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-kxs}

-   At equilibrium, the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the
    rate of the reverse reaction.
-   The ratio between the concentrations of the products and the
    concentrations of the reactants, each raised to the appropriate
    exponent, is constant at a given temperature. This is referred to as
    the equilibrium constant.
-   By convention, only gaseous and aqueous reaction components are
    included in the equilibrium constant expression, since solids and
    liquids do not change concentration when they are consumed
    or formed.
-   The partial pressure of an ideal gas is proportional to
    its concentration. K ~p~ is an alternate way to express the
    equilibrium of a reaction that includes gaseous components.

## Lesson Review Questions {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-e9r}

1.  At chemical equilibrium, what is the relationship between the rate
    of the forward reaction and the rate of the reverse reaction?
2.  What does the law of mass action say about any reaction at
    equilibrium?
3.  Why are solids and liquids left out of the equilibrium constant
    expression?
4.  Explain why the equilibrium constant expression as derived from
    concentrations can be converted to the equilibrium constant
    expression as derived from partial pressures.
5.  Construct balanced chemical equations and write the equilibrium
    constant expression (either K ~p~ or K ~c~ ) for each of the
    following processes.
    1.  Sodium metal reacts vigorously with oxygen gas to produce
        sodium oxide.
    2.  Aluminum oxide decomposes to form aluminum metal and oxygen gas.
    3.  Nitrogen gas and oxygen gas react to form nitrogen monoxide gas.

6.  Give an example of a chemical equilibrium that exists in our
    daily lives.
7.  Write a K ~eq~ expression for each of the following processes.
    1.  Solid calcium carbonate is heated and decomposes into solid
        calcium oxide and carbon dioxide gas.
    2.  Hydrogen gas (H ~2~ ) and solid iodine (I ~2~ ) are combined to
        form hydrogen iodide gas (HI).

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#19.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz-x3d}

-   Equilibrium constants:
    [http://www.chemguide.co.uk/physical/equilibria/kc.html](kc.html)
-   More equilibrium constants:
    [http://chemistry.twu.edu/tutorial/DetEqConstantSum.html](DetEqConstantSum.html)

## Points to Consider {#19.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-twy}

-   How do you suppose the forward and reverse processes are related for
    a given chemical equilibrium?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686154] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686155] -->

# Applications of Equilibrium Constants {#19.html#x-ck12-QXBwbGljYXRpb25zIG9mIEVxdWlsaWJyaXVtIENvbnN0YW50cw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-yhf}

-   Use experimental data to determine an equilibrium constant.
-   Be able to interpret the value of an equilibrium constant to say
    whether the equilibrium for a particular reaction is product-favored
    or reactant-favored.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-uof}

-   **ICE table** : A mathematical method that can be used to determine
    equilibrium constants for chemical reactions based on the Initial,
    Change in, and Equilibrium amounts of reactants and products.

## Check Your Understanding {#19.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-jfa}

-   Write the equilibrium constant expression for the reaction in which
    carbon monoxide gas decomposes into solid carbon and oxygen gas.
    Write the expressions for both K ~c~ and K ~p~ .

## Introduction {#19.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-8t5}

<div
id="19.html#x-ck12-MjJmYzNjYzk3NzRhYjQxZTM0NGM2NTRlZjllMTliNDA.-evn"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Al Pavangkanan" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/drtran/2186120627/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_19_files/20151009235353832499.jpeg)

**Figure 19.4**

The brown color is from nitrogen dioxide gas. Nitrogen dioxide is a
byproduct from the combustion of fossil fuels like coal and gasoline.

</div>

**Figure** [above](#19.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMTlfNA..) shows a brown cloud
over a major U.S. city. The brown color comes from nitrogen dioxide, a
highly toxic gas that exists in equilibrium with other atmospheric
gases. These materials are harmful to health and contribute to other
detrimental processes, such as the formation of acid rain. The
phenomenon is observed primarily in large urban areas where there is a
large amount of automobile traffic in a concentrated area. Urban
locations where air circulation is poor, such as valleys, may see an
especially high amount of these gases.

Under normal conditions, NO ~2~ is in equilibrium with its dimeric form,
N ~2~ O ~4~ . N ~2~ O ~4~ is also quite toxic, but it is colorless. This
equilibrium can be written as the following chemical equation:

![2\\text{NO}\_2(g) \\rightleftarrows
\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/60873b29fd63c8d3d0e68872e6480470.png)

Once this reaction reaches equilibrium, will the material exist mostly
as NO ~2~ , mostly as N ~2~ O ~4~ , or as an approximately even mixture?
To answer this question, we would need to determine the equilibrium
constant for this reaction at the temperature of interest.

## Calculating Equilibrium Constants {#19.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpbmcgRXF1aWxpYnJpdW0gQ29uc3RhbnRz_1-43y}

Experiments are very useful for determining equilibrium constants for
various reactions. We are going to give a simple example of an
experiment that could be done to determine the equilibrium constant for
this reaction.

The equilibrium constant expression for the reaction above has the
following form:

![K\_c=\\frac{\[\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4\]}{\[\\text{NO}\_2\]\^2}](ck12_math_images_dir/aec055fb63f75fd98eb319b6524af76b.png)

In order to calculate the value of K ~c~ , we need to determine the
concentrations of both the reactant and the product for any system that
has reached equilibrium. One possible method for achieving this is as
follows:

-   First, we would put a known amount of our reactant (NO ~2~ ) into a
    rigid container of fixed volume.

<dl id="x-ck12-Y2I5MDg4NDEwY2U4NDAyNjA4MWVkNmE4MDRhMjc3NDM.-h1o">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Y2I5MDg4NDEwY2U4NDAyNjA4MWVkNmE4MDRhMjc3NDM.-3ft">
<dd>
Remember: The equilibrium constant expression only applies for a
specific constant temperature, so we want to keep the temperature
consistent throughout course of the reaction. Most equilibrium constants
are given for a standard temperature of 25°C.

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
-   After putting our reactant into the container, we would allow the
    system to reach equilibrium. We know that the system is at
    equilibrium once the concentrations of each component are no longer
    changing over time. Because N ~2~ O ~4~ is colorless but NO ~2~ is
    brown, the concentration of NO ~2~ can be determined by colorimetry,
    which relates the amount of visible light absorbed by a given sample
    to its concentration.
-   Once at equilibrium, we will determine the concentration of the
    remaining NO ~2~ , and the concentration of N ~2~ O ~4~ can be
    calculated by knowing the total amount of material present in our
    reaction vessel.
-   Finally, these values can then be plugged into the equilibrium
    constant expression to determine the value of the
    equilibrium constant.

**Example 19.4**

0.2000 moles of pure NO ~2~ is placed in a rigid 1-liter container at a
fixed temperature. The system is allowed to reach equilibrium, at which
point the concentration of NO ~2~ is found to be 0.0204 M. Calculate the
equilibrium constant for the following reaction:

![2\\text{NO}\_2(g) \\rightleftarrows
\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/60873b29fd63c8d3d0e68872e6480470.png)

*Answer:*

First, write the equilibrium constant expression for the given equation:

![K\_c=\\frac{\[\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4\]}{\[\\text{NO}\_2\]\^2}](ck12_math_images_dir/aec055fb63f75fd98eb319b6524af76b.png)

We are given the equilibrium concentration of NO ~2~ , so now we need to
find the concentration of N ~2~ O ~4~ . This can be accomplished by
setting up a table that compares the initial and equilibrium amounts of
each reaction component. This type of table is often called an **ICE
table** , where ICE stands for initial, change, equilibrium. Start by
drawing out a blank table for the given reaction:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     ![2\\text{NO}\_2(g ![\\rightleftarrow ![\\text{N}\_2\\te
                     )](ck12_math_image s](ck12_math_image xt{O}\_4(g)](ck12_
                     s_dir/24cea69eb6ba s_dir/d0cd4398b055 math_images_dir/12
                     6d425eb84a8d429f9c 333ab2eb65a863d32f 7256b3c554d8c22c7b
                     e8.png)            46.png)            80639f05a3f4.png)
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Initial amount                                           

  Change                                                   

  Equilibrium amount                                       
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then, fill in the known information:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     ![2\\text{NO}\_2(g ![\\rightleftarrow ![\\text{N}\_2\\te
                     )](ck12_math_image s](ck12_math_image xt{O}\_4(g)](ck12_
                     s_dir/24cea69eb6ba s_dir/d0cd4398b055 math_images_dir/12
                     6d425eb84a8d429f9c 333ab2eb65a863d32f 7256b3c554d8c22c7b
                     e8.png)            46.png)            80639f05a3f4.png)
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Initial amount     0.2000 mol                            0 mol

  Change                                                   

  Equilibrium amount 0.0204 mol                            
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

ICE tables are often written in units of concentration. The values that
we are using in this table have units of moles. We are able to use moles
rather than concentration because the reaction vessel is a rigid 1-L
container, so the number of moles is actually equal to the concentration
( *0.200* mol = *0.200* mol/ 1-L = *0.200* M). As long as the total
volume of the container does not change over the course of the reaction,
using either moles or concentration is an acceptable way to set up this
type of problem.

Because we are starting with no product, we know that the amount of
product will increase and the amount of reactant will decrease before an
equilibrium is reached. Therefore, we can add the following information:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     ![2\\text{NO}\_2(g ![\\rightleftarrow ![\\text{N}\_2\\te
                     )](ck12_math_image s](ck12_math_image xt{O}\_4(g)](ck12_
                     s_dir/24cea69eb6ba s_dir/d0cd4398b055 math_images_dir/12
                     6d425eb84a8d429f9c 333ab2eb65a863d32f 7256b3c554d8c22c7b
                     e8.png)            46.png)            80639f05a3f4.png)
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Initial amount     0.2000 mol                            0 mol

  Change             -2x mol                               +x mol

  Equilibrium amount 0.0204 mol                            x mol
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

These numbers are related to the coefficients from the balanced
equation. If the amount of N ~2~ O ~4~ increases by *x* moles, the
amount of NO ~2~ must decrease by 2 *x* moles. Because we know the
initial and equilibrium amounts of NO ~2~ , we can solve for *x* :

![0.2000 \\ \\text{mol} -2x &=0.0204 \\ \\text{mol} \\\\\\x &=0.0898 \\
\\text{mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/d301492c0ab5b9457ce25fbf277b4cbb.png)

At equilibrium, our reaction mixture contains 0.0204 moles of NO ~2~ and
0.0898 moles of N ~2~ O ~4~ . Because the reaction is taking place in a
1-L container, the concentrations of these two components will be 0.0204
M and 0.0898 M, respectively. Plugging these values into the equilibrium
constant expression, we get the following:

![K\_c &=\\frac{\[\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4\]}{\[\\text{NO}\_2\]\^2}
\\\\\\K\_c &=\\frac{\[0.0898\]}{\[0.0204\]\^2} \\\\\\K\_c &=2.16 \\times
10\^3](ck12_math_images_dir/141407bee0e8ef9cd20fac391aa5483a.png)

The equilibrium constant for this reaction has a value of 2.16 × 10 ^3^
for the temperature at which these data were collected.

Now we will consider a different experiment in which we start with the
product of this reaction (as written above), but no reactant:

**Example 19.5**

0.8450 moles of pure N ~2~ O ~4~ is placed in a rigid 1-liter container
at a fixed temperature (the same temperature as in the previous example
problem). The system is allowed to reach equilibrium, at which point the
concentration of NO ~2~ is found to be 0.01966 M. Calculate the
equilibrium constant for the following reaction:

![2\\text{NO}\_2(g) \\rightleftarrows
\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/60873b29fd63c8d3d0e68872e6480470.png)

*Answer:*

Again, we are given the equilibrium concentration of NO ~2~ , so now we
need to find the concentration of N ~2~ O ~4~ . Start by setting up an
ICE table, including any known information:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     ![2\\text{NO}\_2(g ![\\rightleftarrow ![\\text{N}\_2\\te
                     )](ck12_math_image s](ck12_math_image xt{O}\_4(g)](ck12_
                     s_dir/24cea69eb6ba s_dir/d0cd4398b055 math_images_dir/12
                     6d425eb84a8d429f9c 333ab2eb65a863d32f 7256b3c554d8c22c7b
                     e8.png)            46.png)            80639f05a3f4.png)
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Initial amount     0 mol                                 0.8450 mol

  Change                                                   

  Equilibrium amount 0.01966 mol                           
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Because we are starting with no reactant, we know that the amount of
reactant will increase and the amount of product will decrease before an
equilibrium is reached. Therefore, we can add the following information:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     ![2\\text{NO}\_2(g ![\\rightleftarrow ![\\text{N}\_2\\te
                     )](ck12_math_image s](ck12_math_image xt{O}\_4(g)](ck12_
                     s_dir/24cea69eb6ba s_dir/d0cd4398b055 math_images_dir/12
                     6d425eb84a8d429f9c 333ab2eb65a863d32f 7256b3c554d8c22c7b
                     e8.png)            46.png)            80639f05a3f4.png)
  ------------------ ------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  Initial amount     0 mol                                 0.8450 mol

  Change             +2x mol                               -x mol

  Equilibrium amount 0.01966 mol                           0.8450-x mol
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Using the information given for the final amount of NO ~2~ , solve for
*x* :

![0 \\ \\text{mol} +2x=0.01966 \\ \\text{mol} \\\\\\x=0.00983 \\
\\text{mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/3926ad2623db1f6d0095148a5e494e66.png)

Then, use the value of *x* to determine how much N ~2~ O ~4~ is present
at equilibrium:

![0.8450 \\ \\text{mol} -x=0.8450 \\ \\text{mol}-0.00983 \\
\\text{mol}=0.83517 \\
\\text{mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/c27dc8b72fb7cda9aef30244aecc5ca5.png)

At equilibrium, our reaction mixture contains 0.01966 moles of NO ~2~
and 0.83517 moles of N ~2~ O ~4~ . Because the reaction is taking place
in a 1-L container, the concentrations of these two components will be
0.01966 M and 0.83517 M, respectively. Plugging these values into the
equilibrium constant expression, we get the following:

![K\_c&=\\frac{\[\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4\]}{\[\\text{NO}\_2\]\^2}
\\\\\\K\_c&=\\frac{\[0.83517\]}{\[0.01966\]\^2} \\\\\\K\_c&=2.16 \\times
10\^3](ck12_math_images_dir/f9559db19ac4eba704e638ae37d58a24.png)

Again, the equilibrium constant for this reaction has a value of 2.16 ×
10 ^3^ . The measured equilibrium constant for a given reaction at a set
temperature is always the same, regardless of whether we start with all
reactants, all products, or some combination of the two. Even though the
final concentrations depend on the initial conditions (the final
concentrations are different in the previous two example problems), the
ratio defined by the equilibrium constant expression will have the same
value once the system reaches equilibrium. This shows that the
equilibrium constant is the same for any given chemical reaction at a
specified temperature, regardless of the initial amounts of reactants
and products.

### Interpreting the Value of an Equilibrium Constant {#19.html#x-ck12-SW50ZXJwcmV0aW5nIHRoZSBWYWx1ZSBvZiBhbiBFcXVpbGlicml1bSBDb25zdGFudA.._1-xd4}

What does the value of K ~c~ tell us about the relative position of the
equilibrium? Let's look at the results of the previous example problem.
At equilibrium, we had a product concentration of 0.83517 M and a
reactant concentration of 0.01966 M. Because there are more products
than reactants at equilibrium, we say that this reaction is
*product-favored* at the given temperature. Similarly, reactions in
which the reactants are more prevalent than the products at equilibrium
are said to be *reactant-favored* .

How can we tell whether a reaction is product-favored or
reactant-favored without actually calculating equilibrium amounts?
Remember that in the equilibrium constant expression, the product
concentrations are in the numerator, whereas the reactant concentrations
are in the denominator. In a product-favored equilibrium, the value of
the numerator would be much larger than the value of the denominator, so
K ~eq~ &gt; 1 means that the products are favored over the reactants.
Conversely, a K ~eq~ &lt; 1 would suggest that the reactants are favored
over the products. Finally, a K ~eq~ value that is approximately equal
to 1 means that significant amounts of both the reactants and the
products are present at equilibrium.

## Lesson Summary {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-sna}

-   The equilibrium constant is a ratio that describes the relative
    equilibrium concentrations of products and reactants for a given
    chemical process.
-   An equilibrium constant can be determined from experimental data.
-   Equilibrium constants allow us to predict the relative amounts of
    reactants and products for a given chemical process.
-   The equilibrium constant depends on the temperature at which the
    reaction is taking place, but it does not depend on the
    initial (pre-equilibrium) concentrations of the reactants
    and products.

## Lesson Review Questions {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-4xv}

1.  Write the equilibrium constant expression (K ~c~ ) for each of the
    following processes:
    1.  ![2\\text{O}\_3(g)
        \\rightleftarrows 3\\text{O}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/b857623f3c277ac99bda5479249abb1b.png)
    2.  ![3\\text{O}\_2(g)
        \\rightleftarrows 2\\text{O}\_3(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/ff1e4ac0592cf52b7f73e1e66768e5d8.png)
    3.  ![2\\text{NO}(g)+\\text{Cl}\_2(g)
        \\rightleftarrows 2\\text{NOCl}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/bb7b22245508677202a6cc471a36244e.png)

2.  The equilibrium constants for three different reactions are
    shown below. Are these reactions reactant-favored or
    product-favored?
    1.  4.64 × 10 ^-3^ at 25°C
    2.  2.2 × 10 ^-10^ at 100°C
    3.  150 at 25°C

3.  Write the pressure-based equilibrium constant expression (K ~p~ )
    for the following reaction:
    ![\\text{N}\_2(g)+3\\text{H}\_2(g)\\rightleftarrows 2\\text{NH}\_3(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/6bc0344b31b34260f73acaa2889383cc.png) .
    If K ~p~ =4.3 × 10 ^-3^ for the forward reaction, calculate K ~p~
    for the reverse reaction. ( *Hint* : Write the equilibrium constant
    expression for the reverse reaction. How is it related to the
    expression for the forward reaction?)
4.  The equilibrium constant for the following reaction is equal to 1.74
    × 10 ^-5^ :
    ![\\text{CH}\_3\\text{CO}\_2\\text{H}(aq)+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)
    \\rightleftarrows \\text{CH}\_3\\text{CO}\_2\^-(aq)+\\text{H}\_3\\text{O}\^+(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/ed1a34603bec81b99e8bb2b5f50c2af2.png) .
    Would you expect there to be more CH ~3~ CO ~2~ H or more CH ~3~ CO
    ~2~ ^-^ present after this reaction reaches equilibrium?
5.  What is the value of K ~c~ for the following reaction:
    ![2A+B\\rightleftarrows
    C](ck12_math_images_dir/e75dcae646b935df284972a82e3d4594.png) ? The
    equilibrium concentrations of A, B, and C are \[A\]=1.64 M,
    \[B\]=1.84 M, and \[C\]=0.45 M.
6.  2.34 moles of A and 1.17 moles of B are introduced into a 3.8
    L vessel. They are allowed to react until the following process
    reaches equilibrium: ![2A+B\\rightleftarrows
    C](ck12_math_images_dir/e75dcae646b935df284972a82e3d4594.png) . At
    equilibrium, 0.52 moles of A are present. What is the value of K ~c~
    for this reaction?

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#19.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_1-3qm}

1.  Chemical equilibria simulation:
    [http://group.chem.iastate.edu/Greenbowe/sections/projectfolder/animationsindex.htm](animationsindex.htm)
2.  NO ~2~ /N ~2~ O ~4~ equilibrium experiment: Teresa Anderson Curtin,
    Darryl Wahlstron, McCormick James Journal of Chemical Education 1991
    68 (9), 781

## Points to Consider {#19.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-hdi}

-   Given that the chemical equilibrium for all chemical reactions is
    temperature dependent, how do you suppose temperature influences a
    given chemical equilibrium?
-   Can you think of chemical processes that may be reactant-favored at
    one temperature and product-favored at another?
-   Can you think of other factors that may influence whether or not a
    given chemical process is reactant-favored or product-favored?
-   What is the relationship between the equilibrium constant and the
    stoichiometric coefficients?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686155] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686156] -->

# Factors Affecting Chemical Equilibria {#19.html#x-ck12-RmFjdG9ycyBBZmZlY3RpbmcgQ2hlbWljYWwgRXF1aWxpYnJpYQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-1qm}

-   Determine whether various changes would alter the position of
    an equilibrium.
-   Describe Le Châtelier’s Principle, and use it to predict the
    direction that a reaction would shift in response to
    various changes.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-p9b}

-   **Le Châtelier’s Principle** : States that when a chemical system is
    at equilibrium and is disturbed by a stress, the system will respond
    by attempting to counteract that stress until a new equilibrium
    is established.

## Check Your Understanding {#19.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-cri}

-   Write the equilibrium constant expression for the following chemical
    reaction:
    ![2\\text{NOBr}(g)\\rightleftarrows 2\\text{NO}(s)+\\text{Br}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/9eef1a3a2ff8c9ab4f96f3db01c0be68.png)
-   If K ~c~ for this process is 0.0142, would you expect the reaction
    to be reactant-favored or product-favored?

## Introduction {#19.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-io9}

So far you have learned about what chemical equilibrium means and how to
calculate an equilibrium constant for a reaction based on reaction rate
and reactant component concentrations. In order to establish chemical
equilibrium, the rates of the forward and reverse reactions change until
they become equal. In this lesson, you will learn how a chemical
reaction maintains equilibrium when a stress is put on the system.

## Le Châtelier's Principle {#19.html#x-ck12-TGUgQ2jDonRlbGllcidzIFByaW5jaXBsZQ.._2-1gk}

Equilibrium represents a balance between the reactants and the products
of a chemical reaction. Changes to the conditions of the system can
disturb that equilibrium. When this occurs, the system reacts in such a
way as to restore the equilibrium. However, the position of equilibrium
will be changed following the disturbance. In other words, the response
of the system involves a change in the amounts of the reactants and
products. Some will increase and some will decrease until equilibrium is
reestablished.

Chemical equilibrium was studied by French chemist Henri Le Châtelier
(1850-1936), and his description of how a system at equilibrium responds
to a change in conditions has become known as **Le Châtelier’s
principle** . This principle states that when a chemical system is at
equilibrium and is disturbed by a stress, the system will respond by
attempting to counteract that stress until a new equilibrium is
established. Stresses to a chemical system include changes in the
concentrations of reactants or products, changes in the temperature of
the system, or changes in the pressure of the system. We will discuss
each of these stresses separately. In each case, the change to the
equilibrium position will cause either the forward or reverse reaction
to be favored over the opposite process. When the forward reaction is
favored, the concentrations of the products increase, and the
concentrations of the reactants decrease. When the reverse reaction is
favored, the concentrations of the products decrease, and the
concentrations of the reactants increase.

  Original Equilibrium                                                                              Favored Reaction                                                                                    Result
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------
  ![\\mathrm{A \\rightleftharpoons B}](ck12_math_images_dir/e523a745822f7160e0c46447158d0097.png)   forward: ![\\mathrm{A \\rightarrow B}](ck12_math_images_dir/3a116c2b0ab31b8c4f2251ae681aea3b.png)   \[A\] decreases; \[B\] increases
  ![\\mathrm{A \\rightleftharpoons B}](ck12_math_images_dir/e523a745822f7160e0c46447158d0097.png)   reverse: ![\\mathrm{A \\leftarrow B}](ck12_math_images_dir/d0cc6a4abcbb09ac04ac57a064c93d7f.png)    \[A\] increases; \[B\] decreases

### Concentration {#19.html#x-ck12-Q29uY2VudHJhdGlvbg.._2-jwm}

A change in the concentration of one of the substances in an equilibrium
system typically involves either the addition or the removal of one of
the reactants or products. Consider the Haber-Bosch process for the
industrial production of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen gases:

<dl id="x-ck12-ywv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bhy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-0hx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{N\_2}(g) \\mathrm{+3H\_2}(g) \\mathrm{\\rightleftharpoons
2NH\_3}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/0c1812f4869d2e0b449810cf3457dbc0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If the concentration of one substance in a system is increased, the
system will respond by favoring the reaction that consumes that
substance. When more N ~2~ is added, the forward reaction will be
favored because the forward reaction uses up N ~2~ and converts it to NH
~3~ . Initially, the forward reaction speeds up because one of the
reactants is present at a higher concentration, but the rate of the
reverse reaction is unaffected. Since the two rates are no longer equal,
the system is no longer at equilibrium, and there will be a net shift to
the right (producing more NH ~3~ ) until the two rates are once again
balanced. The concentration of NH ~3~ increases, while the
concentrations of N ~2~ and H ~2~ decrease. After some time passes,
equilibrium is reestablished with new concentrations of all three
substances. As can be seen in **Figure**
[below](#19.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMTktMDMtUmVzdG9yaW5nLUVxdWlsaWJyaXVt) ,
the new concentration of NH ~3~ is higher than it was originally,
because the forward reaction became temporarily favored due to the
stress. The new concentration of H ~2~ is lower. The final concentration
of N ~2~ is higher than it was in the original equilibrium, but lower
than it was immediately after the addition of N ~2~ that disturbed the
original equilibrium. By responding in this way, the value of the
equilibrium constant for the reaction, K ~eq~ , does not change as a
result of the stress to the system.

Conversely, if more NH ~3~ were added, the reverse reaction would be
favored. This “favoring” of a reaction means temporarily speeding up the
reaction in that direction until equilibrium is reestablished. Recall
that once equilibrium is reestablished, the rates of the forward and
reverse reactions are again equal. The addition of NH ~3~ would result
in a net increase in the formation of the reactants, N ~2~ and H ~2~ .

<div
id="19.html#x-ck12-OWM0ZDRmYTlhZDI0Yzc4YmM3YTYxNjBjMWE0ODBhYWM.-qd5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_19_files/20151009235353927471.png)

**Figure 19.5**

The Haber-Bosch process is an equilibrium between the reactants (N ~2~
and H ~2~ ) and the product (NH ~3~ ). When more N ~2~ is added, the
system favors the forward reaction until equilibrium is reestablished.

</div>

An equilibrium can also be disrupted by the full or partial removal of a
reactant or product. If the concentration of a substance is decreased,
the system will respond by favoring the reaction that replaces that
substance. In the industrial Haber-Bosch process, NH ~3~ is removed from
the equilibrium system as the reaction proceeds. As a result, the
forward reaction is favored so that more NH ~3~ will be produced. The
concentrations of N ~2~ and H ~2~ decrease. Continued removal of NH ~3~
will eventually force the reaction to go to completion until all of the
reactants are used up. If either N ~2~ or H ~2~ were removed from the
equilibrium system, the reverse reaction would be favored, and the
concentration of NH ~3~ would decrease.

The effects of changes in concentration on a system at equilibrium are
summarized in **Table**
[below](#19.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6U3RyZXNzZXMtUmVzcG9uc2U.) .

  Stress                 Response
  ---------------------- --------------------------
  addition of reactant   forward reaction favored
  addition of product    reverse reaction favored
  removal of reactant    reverse reaction favored
  removal of product     forward reaction favored

### Temperature {#19.html#x-ck12-VGVtcGVyYXR1cmU._2-skv}

Increasing or decreasing the temperature of a system at equilibrium is
also a stress to the system. The equation for the Haber-Bosch process is
written again below, this time as a thermochemical equation.

<dl id="x-ck12-zlx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-j6q">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bta">
<dd>
![\\text{N}\_2(g) + 3\\text{H}\_2(g) \\rightleftharpoons
2\\text{NH}\_3(g) + 91 \\
\\text{kJ}](ck12_math_images_dir/e29f4a485ae4d821f656b0d6aa7ddba1.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The forward reaction is the exothermic direction; the formation of NH
~3~ releases heat. The reverse reaction is the endothermic direction; as
NH ~3~ decomposes to N ~2~ and H ~2~ , heat is absorbed. An increase in
the temperature of a system favors the direction of the reaction that
absorbs heat, or the endothermic direction. Absorption of heat in this
case is a relief of the stress provided by the temperature increase. For
the Haber-Bosch process, an increase in temperature favors the reverse
reaction. The concentration of NH ~3~ in the system decreases, while the
concentrations of N ~2~ and H ~2~ increase.

Conversely, a decrease in the temperature of a system favors the
direction of the reaction that releases heat, or the exothermic
direction. For the Haber-Bosch process, a decrease in temperature favors
the forward reaction. Therefore the concentration of NH ~3~ in the
system increases, while the concentrations of N ~2~ and H ~2~ decrease.

For changes in concentration, the system responds in such a way that the
value of the equilibrium constant, K ~eq~ , is unchanged. However, a
change in temperature shifts the equilibrium and changes the value of K
~eq~ . As discussed in the previous section, values of K ~eq~ are
dependent on the temperature. When the temperature of the system for the
Haber-Bosch process is increased, the resultant shift in equilibrium
towards the reactants means that the K ~eq~ value decreases. When the
temperature is decreased, the shift in equilibrium towards the products
means that the K ~eq~ value increases.

Le Châtelier’s principle as related to temperature changes can be
illustrated easily by the equilibrium between dinitrogen tetroxide and
nitrogen dioxide.

<dl id="x-ck12-mcj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jlv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-4hz">
<dd>
![\\text{N}\_2\\text{O}\_4(g) + \\text{heat} \\rightleftharpoons
2\\text{NO}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/0eb5b6328cf3ad43dd611ab211c51612.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Dinitrogen tetroxide (N ~2~ O ~4~ ) is colorless, while nitrogen dioxide
(NO ~2~ ) is dark brown in color. When N ~2~ O ~4~ breaks down into NO
~2~ , heat is absorbed according to the forward reaction above.
Therefore, an increase in the temperature of the system will favor the
forward reaction, while a decrease in temperature will favor the reverse
reaction. By changing the temperature, the equilibrium between colorless
N ~2~ O ~4~ and brown NO ~2~ can be manipulated, resulting in a visible
color change.

The video below shows three sealed glass tubes containing N ~2~ O ~4~
and NO ~2~ . When one tube is placed in hot water, the equilibrium
favors the brown NO ~2~ . When another tube is placed in ice cold water,
the equilibrium lies in favor of the colorless N ~2~ O ~4~ .

[http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlGrBcgANSY](watch?v=tlGrBcgANSY) (0:55)

[![](ck12_19_files/tmpIhLLEW.jpeg)](tlGrBcgANSY%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3Ddf4ddc81bd82673149e42832bce464a7)

Click on the image above for more content

### Pressure {#19.html#x-ck12-UHJlc3N1cmU._2-jbk}

Changing the pressure of an equilibrium system in which gases are
involved is also a stress to the system. A change in the pressure on a
liquid or a solid has a negligible effect. We will return again to the
equilibrium for the Haber-Bosch process. Imagine the gases are contained
in a closed system in which the volume of the system is controlled by an
adjustable piston as shown in **Figure**
[below](#19.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMTktMDUtUGlzdG9ucw..) .

<div
id="19.html#x-ck12-YTZmMTA0OTc0YTQwNDg3YTQxNWI3MzIxMzA3NTljYjg.-3qm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_19_files/20151009235354118541.png)

**Figure 19.6**

\(A) A mixture of nitrogen, hydrogen, and ammonia in equilibrium. (B)
When the pressure is increased on the equilibrium mixture, the forward
reaction is favored because that results in a reduction of the total
moles of gas present. (C) Fewer moles of gas will exert a lower total
pressure, so the stress is partially relieved by such a shift.

</div>

On the far left, the reaction system contains primarily N ~2~ and H ~2~
, with only one molecule of NH ~3~ present. As the piston is pushed
inwards, the pressure of the system increases according to Boyle’s Law.
This is a stress to the equilibrium. In the middle image, the same
number of molecules are now confined to a smaller space, so the pressure
has increased. According to Le Châtelier’s principle, the system
responds in order to relieve the stress. In the image on the right, the
forward reaction has been favored, in which each one molecule of N ~2~
combines with three molecules of H ~2~ to form one molecule of NH ~3~ .
The overall result is a decrease in the number of gas molecules in the
entire system. This decreases the pressure and counteracts the original
stress of a pressure increase. When the pressure is increased by
decreasing the available volume, system responds by favoring the
reaction direction that produces fewer gas molecules. In this case, it
is the forward reaction that is favored.

A decrease in pressure on the above system could be achieved by pulling
the piston outward, increasing the container volume. The equilibrium
would respond by favoring the reverse reaction, in which NH ~3~
decomposes to N ~2~ and H ~2~ . This is because the overall number of
gas molecules would increase, and so would the pressure. When the
pressure of a system at equilibrium is decreased by providing more total
volume, the reaction that produces more total moles of gas becomes
favored. This is summarized in the **Table**
[below](#19.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6UHJlc3N1cmUtU3RyZXNzZXM.) .

  Stress              Response
  ------------------- ---------------------------------------
  pressure increase   reaction produces fewer gas molecules
  pressure decrease   reaction produces more gas molecules

Like changes in concentration, the K ~eq~ value for a given reaction is
unchanged by a change in pressure.

It is important to remember when analyzing the effect of a pressure
change on equilibrium that only gases are affected. If a certain
reaction involves liquids or solids, they should be ignored. Calcium
carbonate decomposes according to the equilibrium reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-gpu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bws">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-kc8">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{CaCO\_3}(s) \\mathrm{\\rightleftharpoons CaO}(s)
\\mathrm{+O\_2}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/6e7542c9c46878221b9444989ad8ffb0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Oxygen is the only gas in the system. An increase in the pressure of the
system has no effect on the rate of decomposition of CaCO ~3~ , but it
speeds the reverse reaction by forcing the oxygen molecules closer
together, causing a net shift to the left. When a system contains equal
moles of gas on both sides of the equation, pressure has no effect on
the equilibrium position, as in the formation of HCl from H ~2~ and Cl
~2~ .

<dl id="x-ck12-lbf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-31o">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-b8k">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{H\_2}(g) \\mathrm{+Cl\_2}(g) \\mathrm{\\rightleftharpoons
2HCl}(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/f75b2d4e596dc6f828c1c8ebcc851c06.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
It should also be noted that increasing the pressure by the addition of
an inert gas (nonreactive gas) has *no effect* on the equilibrium. This
can be thought of in terms of the pressure-dependent equilibrium
constant (K ~p~ ). Unlike an increase or decrease in the volume of the
container, the addition of an inert gas does not affect the partial
pressures of any reaction components. Because the ratio of partial
pressures is still equal to the equilibrium constant, no change is
necessary to maintain equilibrium.

### Use of a Catalyst {#19.html#x-ck12-VXNlIG9mIGEgQ2F0YWx5c3Q._2-azq}

Since a catalyst speeds up the rate of a reaction, you might think that
it would have an effect on the equilibrium position. However, catalysts
have equal effects on the forward and reverse rates, so for a system
that is already at equilibrium, these two rates remain equal. A system
will reach equilibrium more quickly in the presence of a catalyst, but
the equilibrium position itself is unaffected.

## Lesson Summary {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-sve}

-   Le Chatelier’s principle describes how a chemical system responds to
    stresses in order to reestablish equilibrium.
-   Changes in the concentrations of reactants or products will cause a
    reaction to shift left or right in order to reestablish an
    equilibrium position. These changes do not change the value of K
    ~eq~ .
-   Changes in temperature will change the value of K ~eq~ . The
    direction of the change depends on whether the reaction is
    endothermic or exothermic.
-   When the pressure of a system is changed by changing the volume of
    the container, reactions in which some components are in the gas
    phase may shift to reestablish equilibrium. Changing the pressure by
    adding an inert gas does not affect a system at equilibrium.
-   Adding a catalyst speeds up the progression of the reaction towards
    equilibrium, but does not change the equilibrium position itself.

## Lesson Review Questions {#19.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-nos}

1.  Describe the basis of Le Chatlier’s principle.
2.  Is the value of the equilibrium constant changed with the addition
    or removal of reactant or product? If so, how? If not, why not?
3.  Is the value of the equilibrium constant changed when the
    temperature is increased or decreased? If so, how? If not, why not?
4.  How does the addition of an inert gas affect the equilibrium of a
    system?
5.  Why does the addition of a catalyst have no effect on the
    equilibrium position?

<!-- -->

6.  The following reaction is allowed to reach equilibrium:
    ![\\text{CaCO}\_3(s)+ \\text{heat}
    \\rightleftarrows \\text{CaO}(s)+\\text{CO}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/ef133c980f3c1f3f6c2143aaac667461.png) .
    Would the reaction shift left, shift right, or remain unchanged in
    response to each of the following changes:
    1.  Increasing the pressure by decreasing the volume at a constant
        temperature
    2.  Increasing the pressure by adding an inert gas at a constant
        temperature and volume
    3.  Increasing the temperature at a constant pressure
    4.  Adding a catalyst

7.  The following reaction is allowed to reach equilibrium:
    ![\\text{CO}(g)+\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(g)+\\text{heat}
    \\rightarrow \\text{CO}\_2(g)+\\text{H}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/c66b936d80691a627c3efa28afb3573c.png) .
    Would the reaction shift left, shift right, or remain unchanged in
    response to each of the following changes:
    1.  Increasing \[CO\]
    2.  Decreasing \[H ~2~ \]
    3.  Decreasing \[H ~2~ O\]
    4.  Increasing \[CO ~2~ \]

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#19.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-c1n}

-   Chemical equilibria simulation:
    [http://group.chem.iastate.edu/Greenbowe/sections/projectfolder/animationsindex.htm](animationsindex.htm)
-   (Curtin, Wahlstron and McCormick, 1991). NO2/N2O4
    equilibrium experiment. Journal of Chemical Education 1991 68 (9),
    781

## Points to Consider {#19.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-jhm}

-   When chemical equilibrium is achieved for a given chemical process,
    the rate at which the forward process occurs is the same as the rate
    at which the reverse process occurs. What factors do you suppose
    affect the rate at which equilibrium is achieved?
-   Some chemical processes are spontaneous, while others are not. How
    do you suppose chemical equilibrium is related to whether or not a
    chemical process is spontaneous or not?
-   Can you think of examples where a particular process is spontaneous
    under certain conditions (say temperature) and nonspontaneous under
    other conditions?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686156] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#19.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-nzy}

1.  Photogravure by H. Liffart, Berlin; scanned, image processed, and
    uploaded by Armin Kübelbeck.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Claude\_Louis\_Berthollet\_01.jpg](File:Claude_Louis_Berthollet_01.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  Alisha Vargas.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/alishav/3953941345/]() . CC BY 2.0
3.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
4.  Al Pavangkanan.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/drtran/2186120627/]() . CC BY 2.0
5.  Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
6.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0

<span id="20.html"></span>

# Entropy and Free Energy {#20.html#x-ck12-RW50cm9weSBhbmQgRnJlZSBFbmVyZ3k.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_20_files/20151009235400326487.jpeg)
</span>

The two paintings above represent two distinct movements in
twentieth-century abstract art. Pollock was a proponent of abstract
expressionism, mainly a post-World War II development. He was well-known
for his drip paintings, where paint is dripped or poured on the canvas.
Mondrian was strongly influenced by the earlier Cubist movement, which
was characterized by extensive use of geometric forms. We can see the
high level of disorder in Pollock’s work, generated by random activity.
On the other hand, the paintings by Mondrian represent a high level of
structure and order.

The world we live in has aspects of order and disorder. We see order in
the regular crystalline structure of solid sodium chloride and disorder
in the random spattering of raindrops on a sidewalk. We also can observe
changes in the amount of random movement exhibited by a single
substance. For example, ice is highly ordered; each molecule of water is
held rigidly in place by a network of hydrogen bonds. As the ice melts,
the molecules gain more freedom of movement. They still cluster together
into a liquid, but the individual molecules are free to move past one
another and exchange hydrogen bonding partners. As the water vaporizes,
its movement becomes even less restricted. No longer bound by
intermolecular interactions, each molecule of water is free to move in
essentially any direction. In this chapter, we will be discussing the
concept of entropy, which quantifies order and disorder as pertains to
chemical processes.

^Left:\\ Image\\ copyright\\ Lauren\\ Jade\\ Goudie,\\ 2014.\\ www.shutterstock.com.\\ Used\\ under\\ licenses\\ from\\ Shutterstock.com.^

^Right:\\ Image\\ copyright\\ Fedorov\\ Oleksiy,\\ 2014.\\ www.shutterstock.com.\\ Used\\ under\\ licenses\\ from\\ Shutterstock.com.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686158] -->

# Entropy {#20.html#x-ck12-RW50cm9weQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-ws4}

-   Describe what it means to call a process spontaneous, and
    give examples.
-   Define entropy.
-   Be able to predict whether the entropy of a system is increasing
    or decreasing.
-   Calculate ΔS° ~rxn~ from appropriate data.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-kp9}

-   **spontaneous** : Describes a reaction in which the given conditions
    favor the formation of the products.
-   **entropy (S)** : A measure of probability or the degree of order.
-   **standard entropy** : A measure of the entropy of a substance at
    25°C and 1 atm of pressure.
-   **second law of thermodynamics** : States that the entropy of the
    universe will increase for any spontaneous process.
-   **third law of thermodynamics** : States that a perfectly regular
    crystal at a temperature of 0 K (absolute zero) would have an
    entropy value of 0.

## Check Your Understanding {#20.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-st4}

-   How can we tell whether a reaction is exothermic or endothermic?
-   What does the value of an equilibrium constant tell us about a
    reversible reaction?
-   What information is needed to calculate the enthalpy change for a
    given reaction?

## Introduction {#20.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-4yf}

Have you ever wondered why it is easy to let your bedroom get messy, but
much more difficult to keep it neat? When your bedroom is neat and
orderly, everything is in a place where it belongs. When it's messy,
everything seems to be out of order. It's as if you're bedroom naturally
becomes messy, but you have to make an effort to keep it neat. Physical
and chemical processes can be thought of in a similar way. There is a
natural tendency for a physical or chemical process to progress in a
certain direction. In this lesson, you will learn about the quantity
used describe orderliness and how to predict the reaction direction in
physical and chemical processes.

## What is a Spontaneous Process? {#20.html#x-ck12-V2hhdCBpcyBhIFNwb250YW5lb3VzIFByb2Nlc3M_-lls}

Chemists want to be able to predict the outcome of reactions. They would
like it to be possible to predict what will happen when reactants are
added together under a given set of conditions. The conditions of a
reaction might include things like temperature, pressure, and
concentrations of various reaction components. If the given conditions
favor the formation of products, the reaction is said to be
**spontaneous** .

It should be noted that just because a process is spontaneous does not
mean that it occurs quickly. The rusting of iron is a spontaneous
process that takes place over a long period of time. The combustion of
gasoline in oxygen (also a spontaneous process) is extremely fast when
provided with a spark, but gasoline can be stored in air for quite a
while without spontaneously combusting. Thermodynamics predicts the
direction in which a reaction will eventually proceed, but it does not
tell us anything about the rate at which the reaction occurs. The rate
of a reaction depends on many factors, including activation energy,
temperature, concentration, and the presence or absence of a catalyst.
Chemical kinetics focuses on the pathway between reactants and products,
while thermodynamics considers only the difference between the initial
and final states.

We know of many examples of processes that occur spontaneously. If the
temperature is below 0°C, a glass of liquid water will freeze. If the
temperature is above 0°C, a cube of ice will melt. A hot object will
gradually lose heat to its surroundings. Many chemical reactions also
occur spontaneously. Two molecules of hydrogen will react with one
molecule of oxygen to form water, releasing a significant amount of
energy in the process. The spontaneous reaction between aluminum and
bromine to form aluminum bromide also releases energy.

<div
id="20.html#x-ck12-ZWFlNDZkYmUxM2U0YjEyZmYxZTFhZWMxNmFmNGNiOWE.-fb9"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of NOAA" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:NOAA_arctic_spring_1950_corp1104.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_20_files/20151009235400444570.jpeg)

**Figure 20.1**

Melting ice in the Beaufort Sea off the North Slope of Alaska.

</div>

However, a process does not need to be exothermic in order to be
spontaneous. For example, the melting of ice is an endothermic process,
but it is still spontaneous at high enough temperatures. If we add
ammonium nitrate to water, it will spontaneously dissolve, but the
resulting solution will be cooler, indicating that energy in the form of
heat was consumed in the process. To determine whether a process is
spontaneous, we need to look not only at the change in enthalpy, but
also the change in a factor called entropy.

## What Is Entropy? {#20.html#x-ck12-V2hhdCBJcyBFbnRyb3B5Pw..-ab7}

At its most basic level, **entropy** (S) is a measure of probability.
States that have a high probability of occurring by random chance have a
high entropy value, and states that are unlikely to occur by random
chance have a low entropy value. There is a natural tendency for things
to increase in entropy over time. An equivalent statement is that nature
will spontaneously move toward the states that have the highest
probability of existing.

Entropy can also be thought of as the number of possible arrangements
that lead to a certain state. The more ways that a given state can be
achieved, the greater the probability of finding that state, and the
higher its entropy value. For example, think about the objects in your
bedroom. Imagine every item being randomly placed at some location
within the room. Now imagine this happening again and again. How many of
the resulting arrangements would lead you to classify your room as
"messy?" How many would qualify as a "clean" room? In this hypothetical
example, every state has an equal possibility of happening, but because
there are so many more ways to arrange items to make a messy room than a
clean room, the "messy" state would have a higher entropy value than the
"clean" state.

There are many examples in the chemical world of changes in entropy.
Phase transitions are one obvious example. When a substance makes a
transition from the liquid state to the gaseous state, the particles
have many more possible arrangements, because they are no longer
confined to a specified volume in which they are close to each other;
gas particles can move freely throughout their container. Vaporization
represents an increase in entropy. In the opposite direction, a liquid
loses entropy when it freezes to a solid. Because solids have very
ordered structures, there are fewer possible arrangements of particles
that would result in the properties associated with a solid.

## The Second Law of Thermodynamics {#20.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFNlY29uZCBMYXcgb2YgVGhlcm1vZHluYW1pY3M.-egc}

Recall that, according to the first law of thermodynamics, the total
amount of energy in the universe is conserved for any given process.
Entropy is not conserved; in fact, it is always increasing. Nature is
constantly moving from less probable states to more probable ones. The
**second law of thermodynamics** states that the entropy of the universe
will increase for any spontaneous process.

To determine whether a given process is spontaneous, it is often helpful
to break down the total entropy change as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-NWRkZTc3YmE3MGRlMDA3YWYzMmIyMzg4ZjYyYzRjNmM.-mep">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWRkZTc3YmE3MGRlMDA3YWYzMmIyMzg4ZjYyYzRjNmM.-4gm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWRkZTc3YmE3MGRlMDA3YWYzMmIyMzg4ZjYyYzRjNmM.-zgf">
<dd>
ΔS ~univ~ = ΔS ~sys~ + ΔS ~surr~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where ΔS ~sys~ and ΔS ~surr~ represent the changes in entropy that occur
in the system and in the surroundings, respectively.

To predict whether a given reaction will be spontaneous, we need to know
the sign of ΔS ~univ~ . If ΔS ~univ~ is positive, the entropy of the
universe increases, and the reaction is spontaneous in the direction
that it is written. If ΔS ~univ~ is negative, the reaction is
spontaneous in the reverse direction. If ΔS ~univ~ is equal to zero, the
system is at equilibrium. To predict whether a reaction is spontaneous,
we need to determine the entropy changes in the system and in the
surroundings.

### Entropy of a System (ΔS ~sys~ ) {#20.html#x-ck12-RW50cm9weSBvZiBhIFN5c3RlbSAozpRT-nbc}

Let’s consider the change of state for one mole of water from liquid to
gas:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZTNiYTgyYjQ0N2Y3NjQwNjRkM2U2MmQwZGEzZjA3Nzc.-zty">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTNiYTgyYjQ0N2Y3NjQwNjRkM2U2MmQwZGEzZjA3Nzc.-ibq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTNiYTgyYjQ0N2Y3NjQwNjRkM2U2MmQwZGEzZjA3Nzc.-o3m">
<dd>
H ~2~ O ~(l)~ → H ~2~ O ~(g)~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this case, the water is the system, and the surrounding are
everything else. How does the entropy of the water change in this
process? As we saw earlier, the vaporization process leads to an
increase in entropy, because there are many more possible ways to
arrange the individual water molecules when they are allowed to move
freely about their container. The entropy of the system increases, so ΔS
~sys~ will be a positive value.

<div
id="20.html#x-ck12-ODYxZjNmNDFjNzdkMDgyZTJhZjNmNTkwMzAxODdhMjQ.-3z5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:MONGO/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Steamboat_Geyser.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_20_files/20151009235400622472.jpeg)

**Figure 20.2**

</div>

Phase changes are one type of process for which we can reliably predict
the sign of the change in entropy. Not all transformations are quite so
obvious, but the direction of the change in entropy can be easily
predicted for certain types of chemical reactions.

1.  If there is a difference in the number of gaseous components between
    the reactants and the products, the side with more moles of gas will
    most likely have a higher entropy value. This is because a greater
    number of moles indicates a greater number of gas particles and a
    greater number of arrangements of the gas particles.

For example, consider the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-NDkyYmQ0ZmRiYWU3YTVlOGI0OTljM2Y1Mzg3MDY1MGQ.-abw">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDkyYmQ0ZmRiYWU3YTVlOGI0OTljM2Y1Mzg3MDY1MGQ.-gd4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDkyYmQ0ZmRiYWU3YTVlOGI0OTljM2Y1Mzg3MDY1MGQ.-ekj">
<dd>
2 H ~2~ (g) + O ~2~ (g) → 2 H ~2~ O(g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Three moles of gaseous reactants combine to make two moles of gaseous
products. Therefore, we would expect this process to result in a
decrease in entropy. ΔS ~sys~ will have a negative value for this
reaction.

2.  Dissolved substances have a higher entropy value than their
    corresponding precipitate.

For example, if we mix silver nitrate with sodium chloride, we have the
following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-YjcyNDUzYWY1NTdlN2I2OTkyMzdjNWI4NzYzY2JjNWE.-vab">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjcyNDUzYWY1NTdlN2I2OTkyMzdjNWI4NzYzY2JjNWE.-w43">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjcyNDUzYWY1NTdlN2I2OTkyMzdjNWI4NzYzY2JjNWE.-8zb">
<dd>
AgNO ~3~ (aq) + NaCl(aq) → NaNO ~3~ (aq) + AgCl(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The ions from the aqueous components are free to move around the entire
solution, but the silver and chloride ions in the solid AgCl are all
clustered together into a precipitate, ordered into a specific pattern
of alternating cations and anions. Overall, this transformation
represents a decrease in the entropy of the system.

3.  All else being equal, more separate particles corresponds to a
    higher degree of entropy.

This makes sense when we think about the arrangements available.
Consider the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZTZhMjhjODA3Y2YxYjM1NjU4OWYwMTQyMTMwMjI2MGI.-gkf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTZhMjhjODA3Y2YxYjM1NjU4OWYwMTQyMTMwMjI2MGI.-lbi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTZhMjhjODA3Y2YxYjM1NjU4OWYwMTQyMTMwMjI2MGI.-jyk">
<dd>
C(s) + O ~2~ (g) → CO ~2~ (g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Each side of this equation contains one mole of gas particles, so that
will not be a deciding factor. However, there are more total particles
on the reactants side than on the products side. Because there are more
ways to arrange two moles of particles than one mole of particles, this
process represents an overall decrease in entropy.

4.  If there is an increase in temperature, entropy will increase.

So far, we have been thinking about entropy in terms of the ways in
which particles can be distributed over a certain amount of space.
However, other factors that are subject to random distributions also
make contributions to the entropy of a system. As you know, an increase
in temperature means that there is more overall kinetic energy available
to the individual particles. This energy is distributed randomly through
enormous amounts of collisions between particles. Having more energy
available means that there are more ways that it can be distributed, so
an increase in temperature also corresponds to an increase in entropy.

### Entropy of the Surroundings (ΔS ~surr~ ) {#20.html#x-ck12-RW50cm9weSBvZiB0aGUgU3Vycm91bmRpbmdzICjOlFM.-u6a}

In general, the process of interest is taking place in the system, and
there are no changes in the composition of the surroundings. However,
the temperature of the surroundings does generally change. Entropy
changes in the surroundings are determined primarily by the flow of heat
into or out of the system. In an exothermic process, heat flows into the
surroundings, increasing the kinetic energy of the nearby particles. For
an exothermic reaction, ΔS ~surr~ is positive. Conversely, heat flows
from the surroundings into the system during an endothermic process,
lowering the kinetic energy available to the surroundings and resulting
in a negative value for ΔS ~surr~ .

As it turns out, the amount of entropy change for a given amount of heat
transfer also depends on the absolute temperature. We will not go into
the exact derivation, but it turns out that the entropy change of the
surroundings can be defined in terms of the enthalpy change of the
system:

<dl id="x-ck12-gkq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-wjx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-t9k">
<dd>
![\\Delta S\_{surr}=-\\frac{\\Delta
H\_{sys}}{T}](ck12_math_images_dir/9da8fbb433d68ddd2babe1cdb393111b.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where T is the temperature in Kelvin. For an exothermic reaction, ΔH
~sys~ is negative, so ΔS ~surr~ would be a positive value. This makes
sense, because heat is being released into the surroundings, increasing
the amount of kinetic energy available to the surrounding particles. For
an endothermic reaction, ΔH ~sys~ is positive, so ΔS ~surr~ would be a
negative value.

### Entropy of the Universe (ΔS ~univ~ ) {#20.html#x-ck12-RW50cm9weSBvZiB0aGUgVW5pdmVyc2UgKM6UUw..-ty7}

Substituting this into our earlier equation for ΔS ~univ~ , we get the
following:

![\\Delta S\_{univ} &=\\Delta S\_{sys}+\\Delta S\_{surr} \\\\\\\\Delta
S\_{univ} &=\\Delta S\_{sys}-\\frac{\\Delta
H\_{sys}}{T}](ck12_math_images_dir/e6b6ac111eaafba6868668cc7654d919.png)

This is a particularly useful equation, because it allows us to
determine whether a process is spontaneous by looking only at the system
of interest. It also helps to explain why not all exothermic reactions
are spontaneous, and not all reactions that increase the entropy of the
system are spontaneous. The enthalpy change, entropy change, and overall
temperature all factor into whether a given transformation will proceed
spontaneously.

## The Third Law of Thermodynamics {#20.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFRoaXJkIExhdyBvZiBUaGVybW9keW5hbWljcw..-bmo}

When we discussed enthalpy, we always talked about changes in enthalpy,
never about the absolute enthalpy of a substance. Even the standard
enthalpy of formation value (ΔH° ~f~ ) is a measure of the change in
enthalpy between a compound and its elements in their standard states.
There is no absolute zero for enthalpy, but this is not true for
entropy. The **third law of thermodynamics** says that a perfectly
regular crystal at a temperature of 0 K (absolute zero) would have an
entropy value of 0.

As the temperature of a perfect crystal increases, its particles start
to vibrate slightly around their optimal positions, thus increasing the
entropy of the system. The dependence of entropy on temperature varies
by substance, so the only temperature at which all crystals have the
same entropy is absolute zero. The **standard entropy** of a substance
is a measure of its entropy at 25°C and 1 atm of pressure. Like standard
enthalpy of formation values, standard entropies are tabulated for a
wide range of substances. However, unlike enthalpy of formation values,
all standard entropy values are positive, because the absolute zero for
entropy is the most ordered possible state. Additionally, this means
that pure elements in their standard states do *not* have a standard
entropy of zero.

Because entropy changes are generally small compared to enthalpy
changes, we generally express their units in terms of joules instead of
kilojoules. Standard entropy values are most commonly given in units of
J/K•mol. A few representative values are given in the following table:

  Substance                   Standard Entropy S° J/K•mol
  --------------------------- -----------------------------
  H ~2~ O ~(l)~               69.95
  H ~2~ O ~(g)~               188.84
  carbon (graphite)           5.6
  carbon (diamond)            2.377
  carbon (vapor)              158.1
  methane - CH ~4~ (g)        186.26
  ethane - C ~2~ H ~6~ (g)    229.2
  propane - C ~3~ H ~8~ (g)   270.3

Note: When referring to standard entropy, standard enthalpy of
formation, and standard heat of formation, we use the notation with the
degree symbol to indicate the standard conditions of 25°C and 1 atm.
Without the degree symbol these values are not necessarily from the
standard state.

As expected, the entropy values for solids are low, the values for gases
are high, and the ones for liquids are intermediate. Another observation
can be made by looking at the three hydrocarbon gases at the end of the
table. For similar molecules, a higher molecular weight generally leads
to a larger standard entropy value. Although this is a drastic
oversimplification, we can think of this in terms of the electrons that
make up each molecule. A larger molecular weight generally means more
protons, which also means more electrons. There are more ways to arrange
a large number of electrons within a molecule than there are to arrange
a smaller number. Although these arrangements are heavily constrained by
the positions of the various nuclei, there is still an overall trend for
larger molecules to have higher entropy values.

## Calculating ΔS ~rxn~ {#20.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpbmcgzpRT-2hp}

Calculations of the change in entropy for a given reaction are analogous
to those used to determine ΔH ~rxn~ . The entropy change for a reaction
can be calculated by taking the difference between the total of the
standard entropy values of the products and those of the reactants:

<dl id="x-ck12-82d">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-nkh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-rsk">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}=\\Sigma n S\^\\circ(products)-
\\Sigma n
S\^\\circ(reactants)}](ck12_math_images_dir/cbc6ddb4bd6aa64a0534392d7a5d62e3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
As with our enthalpy calculations, each standard entropy value is
multiplied by the coefficient of the corresponding substance in the
balanced equation. Extensive tables of standard entropy values can be
found on the internet.

**Example 20.1**

Calculate ΔS ~rxn~ for the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-vlq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-08h">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-xt5">
<dd>
![\\text{N}\_2(g)+3\\text{H}\_2(g) \\to
2\\text{NH}\_3(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/683a5b4ca213a9f4ea4f4fc0a6deeff2.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The standard entropy values for N ~2~ , H ~2~ , and NH ~3~ are 191.6,
130.7, and 192.5 J/K•mol, respectively.

*Answer:*

Multiply the standard entropy value of each component by its coefficient
from the balanced equation, and subtract the values of the reactants
from those of the products.

![\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}} &=\\mathrm{\\Sigma n
S\^\\circ(products)- \\Sigma n S\^\\circ(reactants)}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}}
&=\\mathrm{2S\^\\circ(NH\_3)-\[S\^\\circ(N\_2)+3S\^\\circ(H\_2)\]}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}} &=\\mathrm{2(192.5 \\ J/K
\\cdot mol)-\[191.6 \\ J/K \\cdot mol+3(130.7 \\ J/K \\cdot mol)\]}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}} &=\\mathrm{-198.7 \\ J/K
\\cdot mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/0995e020d2a32964face66b08dcb5d88.png)

There is a substantial decrease in entropy over the course of this
reaction. This could have been predicted simply by looking at the
balanced equation. There are four moles of gaseous reactants and just
two moles of gaseous products. In general, the side of the equation with
more moles of gas has a higher total entropy.

**Example 20.2**

Predict whether the change in entropy would be positive or negative for
the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-jav">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ovq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-wix">
<dd>
![\\text{CaCO}\_3(s) \\to
\\text{CaO}(s)+\\text{CO}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/ff767b424f8b383dec8d061d577e30c4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Then, use the standard entropy values for each substance to calculate
the exact change in entropy.

*Answer:*

A single solid reactant is splitting into two products, one of which is
a gas. We would expect the entropy of the system to increase over the
course of this reaction. The exact change can be calculated as follows:

![\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}} &=\\mathrm{\\Sigma n
S\^\\circ(products)- \\Sigma n S\^\\circ(reactants)}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}}
&=\\mathrm{\[S\^\\circ(CaO)+S\^\\circ(CO\_2)\]-S\^\\circ(CaCO\_3)}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}} &=\\mathrm{\[39.8 \\ J/K
\\cdot mol + 213.6 \\ J/K \\cdot mol\]-92.9 \\ J/K \\cdot mol}
\\\\\\\\mathrm{\\Delta S \^\\circ\_{rxn}} &=\\mathrm{160.5 \\ J/K \\cdot
mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/94d85c9ac906791e3dc37ffddfc7d1c2.png)

As predicted, ΔS ~rxn~ is a positive value, indicating that entropy
increases upon going from reactants to products.

## Lesson Summary {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-olb}

-   A process is spontaneous if the formation of products is favored
    under the given conditions. Spontaneous processes may be fast
    or slow.
-   Entropy (S) measures the probability of attaining a given state.
    Things naturally progress towards more probable states, so entropy
    has a tendency to increase.
-   The second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of the
    universe will increase during any spontaneous process.
-   The change in the entropy of the universe can be broken down into
    the following components:

<dl id="x-ck12-NWRkZTc3YmE3MGRlMDA3YWYzMmIyMzg4ZjYyYzRjNmM.-phk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWRkZTc3YmE3MGRlMDA3YWYzMmIyMzg4ZjYyYzRjNmM.-dvr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWRkZTc3YmE3MGRlMDA3YWYzMmIyMzg4ZjYyYzRjNmM.-ngr">
<dd>
ΔS ~univ~ = ΔS ~sys~ + ΔS ~surr~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
-   The sign of ΔS ~univ~ tells us whether or not a process is
    spontaneous in the direction that it is written. If ΔS ~univ~ is
    positive, then the forward reaction is spontaneous.
-   The third law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of a perfect
    crystal at 0 K is zero.
-   Standard entropy is the entropy of a substance at 25°C and 1 atm
    of pressure.
-   The entropy change for a reaction can be calculated using standard
    entropy values.

## Lesson Review Questions {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-jeg}

1.  Define entropy.
2.  State the second law of thermodynamics.
3.  For each of the following situations, state whether there is an
    increase or decrease in entropy. Explain your reasoning in
    each case.
    1.  liquid water freezes.
    2.  a car is in a collision that completely demolishes it.
    3.  wood burns.
    4.  I ~2~ (s) → I ~2~ (g).
    5.  2 Mg(s) + O ~2~ (g) → 2 MgO(s).

Use the entropy values from
[http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/Table-of-Standard-Molar-Entropies-1184.html](Table-of-Standard-Molar-Entropies-1184.html)
for the following calculations:

4.  Calculate ΔS° ~rxn~ for the reaction H ~2~ (g) + Cl ~2~ (g)
    → 2HCl(g).
5.  Calculate ΔS° ~rxn~ for reactions d and e of question 3, and comment
    on how well your predictions matched the actual entropy changes.
6.  Which form of carbon has a higher degree of organization: diamond or
    graphite? Explain your answer.
7.  Compare the S° of ethane with that of ethanol (159.9 J/K•mol).
    Explain why ethane has a higher standard entropy value than ethanol.
    (Hint: the boiling point of ethane is -89°C, and the boiling point
    of ethanol is 78°C. At what temperature are standard entropy values
    tabulated?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#20.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-let}

-   Some basic ideas about entropy:
    [http://entropysimple.oxy.edu/content.htm](content.htm)
-   Entropy values:
    [http://boomeria.org/chemtextbook/cch20.html](cch20.html)
-   Table of standard molar entropies:
    [http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/Table-of-Standard-Molar-Entropies-1184.html](Table-of-Standard-Molar-Entropies-1184.html)

## Points to Consider {#20.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-8vy}

-   Can we reliably predict under what conditions a reaction will be
    spontaneous?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686158] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686159] -->

# Spontaneous Reactions and Free Energy {#20.html#x-ck12-U3BvbnRhbmVvdXMgUmVhY3Rpb25zIGFuZCBGcmVlIEVuZXJneQ..}

## Lesson Objectives {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-m8m}

-   Define Gibbs free energy, and be able to calculate the change in
    Gibbs free energy for a given process when provided with the
    appropriate data.
-   Use the value for Gibbs free energy to predict whether a reaction
    will occur spontaneously.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-naq}

-   **Gibbs free energy** : A thermodynamic quantity that combines
    enthalpy and entropy into a single value in order to predict whether
    or not a process is spontaneous.

## Check Your Understanding {#20.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-ds8}

-   What must be true for a reaction to be considered spontaneous?

## Gibbs Free Energy {#20.html#x-ck12-R2liYnMgRnJlZSBFbmVyZ3k._1-foy}

We have learned that a spontaneous reaction must increase the total
entropy in the universe: ΔS ~univ~ &gt; 0. To analyze the entropic
effects of a given process, we generally break this quantity down into
two separate components. This is expressed with the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZTBlYWNmOTBlN2Q5YzFkMzljYzBiNjJjYzFiNjg5MjI.-bdh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTBlYWNmOTBlN2Q5YzFkMzljYzBiNjJjYzFiNjg5MjI.-clf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTBlYWNmOTBlN2Q5YzFkMzljYzBiNjJjYzFiNjg5MjI.-xrv">
<dd>
ΔS ~univ~ = ΔS ~sys~ + ΔS ~surr~ &gt; 0

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In general, the entropy change for a chemical reaction or phase change
can be easily determined from standard entropy values. Additionally, we
saw in the previous lesson that the following relationship is true:

<dl id="x-ck12-M2U1MTliMjM2YjcxNzE0YjEwY2UyMDk2YWUwNDE0NzE.-vg1">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2U1MTliMjM2YjcxNzE0YjEwY2UyMDk2YWUwNDE0NzE.-pqc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2U1MTliMjM2YjcxNzE0YjEwY2UyMDk2YWUwNDE0NzE.-kwe">
<dd>
ΔS ~surr~ = - ![\\mathrm{\\frac{\\Delta
H\_{sys}}{T}}](ck12_math_images_dir/dea2d01350752c49c64d8d149b83cf40.png)
.

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Substituting this into the above equation, we get the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-NGM3NjUxOGVmYzk0ZjdhYzNjMDE1OWU0NDhmYzRjOGU.-tin">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGM3NjUxOGVmYzk0ZjdhYzNjMDE1OWU0NDhmYzRjOGU.-jcr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGM3NjUxOGVmYzk0ZjdhYzNjMDE1OWU0NDhmYzRjOGU.-srb">
<dd>
ΔS ~univ~ = ΔS ~sys~ - ![\\mathrm{\\frac{\\Delta
H\_{sys}}{T}}](ck12_math_images_dir/dea2d01350752c49c64d8d149b83cf40.png)
&gt; 0

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This equation can then be rearranged as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-OGIxY2I3YjUzODRkYjNhNGQzOTYzMjllYjhkY2M2NjM.-6g4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGQ3ZmJmNTI1YWU1MzYyYThjNzljNWI3MGVlNDA0NTc.-hqu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGQ3ZmJmNTI1YWU1MzYyYThjNzljNWI3MGVlNDA0NTc.-bdq">
<dd>
TΔS ~univ~ = - ΔH ~sys~ + TΔS ~sys~ &gt; 0

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjhkMDRlNWIxY2IzMjYzZDBjYWM0MzkyNjJlNGNmMmI.-num">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjhkMDRlNWIxY2IzMjYzZDBjYWM0MzkyNjJlNGNmMmI.-hvu">
<dd>
- TΔS ~univ~ = ΔH ~sys~ - TΔS ~sys~ &lt; 0

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Now we can talk about the entropy changes in the universe simply by
looking at data about the system of interest. If the results of the
equation are less than zero, the reaction will be spontaneous. The
American physicist Josiah Gibbs took this idea and introduced a
thermodynamic quantity that combines enthalpy and entropy into a single
value that has been named after him. **Gibbs free energy** is defined by
the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-NTVlMmM0ODYxZDc5YmU4ODg3MjY2YTVlYzk5YWYyMWE.-2kj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTVlMmM0ODYxZDc5YmU4ODg3MjY2YTVlYzk5YWYyMWE.-t8k">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTVlMmM0ODYxZDc5YmU4ODg3MjY2YTVlYzk5YWYyMWE.-7ya">
<dd>
ΔG = ΔH ~sys~ - TΔS ~sys~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where ΔG is the change in free energy, ΔH is the change in enthalpy, T
is the temperature (in Kelvin), and ΔS is the change in entropy. As we
can see by comparing this to the derived equations above, the value of
ΔG must be less than zero for a spontaneous process. Stated another way,
systems have a natural tendency to move towards a minimum amount of free
energy.

<div
id="20.html#x-ck12-YWQxNDU1MGY4OTBiMTBmYTMzNTk2NWMzODFiZTM1YzM.-iux"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="J. Willard Gibbs" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gibbs_Josiah_Willard.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_20_files/20151009235400721932.jpeg)

**Figure 20.3**

Gibbs postulated that a system progressed towards the equilibrium
direction which exhibited the highest entropy.

</div>

## Standard Free Energy Change {#20.html#x-ck12-U3RhbmRhcmQgRnJlZSBFbmVyZ3kgQ2hhbmdl_1-cuq}

Much like the corresponding equations for ΔH° ~rxn~ and ΔS° ~rxn~ , ΔG°
~rxn~ for a given reaction can be calculated from the corresponding ΔG°
~f~ values, which are tabulated for a wide variety of substances.

<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-hec">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-rfu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-3qk">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = ΣnΔG° ~f~ (products) – ΣnΔG° ~f~ (reactants)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
As with the standard enthalpy of formation values, there is no absolute
zero for Gibbs free energy, so each ΔG° ~f~ value is the change in free
energy for a compound when prepared from its constituent elements in
their standard states. Also like the enthalpy of formation values, ΔG°
~f~ for any element in its most stable form at 25°C is zero.

**Example 20.3**

Calculate the value of ΔG° ~rxn~ for the combustion of methane:

<dl id="x-ck12-MTZmYjM2MzkxMWNkYzk2ZGUzZWQ4MTNhMzA2YzA2ZDg.-zdg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTZmYjM2MzkxMWNkYzk2ZGUzZWQ4MTNhMzA2YzA2ZDg.-5ez">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTZmYjM2MzkxMWNkYzk2ZGUzZWQ4MTNhMzA2YzA2ZDg.-jwz">
<dd>
CH ~4~ (g) + 2O ~2~ (g) → CO ~2~ (g) + 2H ~2~ O(l)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
ΔG° ~f~ values can be found at the following website:
[http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/GenChem-Textbook/The-Free-Energy-629.html](The-Free-Energy-629.html)

*Answer:*

Multiply each ΔG° ~f~ value by the coefficient from the balanced
equation, and subtract the free energy of the reactants from that of the
products. Note that water is present as a liquid, so make sure to use
the ΔG° ~f~ value for the correct state. Because O ~2~ (g) is the
standard form of oxygen, it has a ΔG° ~f~ value of zero.

<dl id="x-ck12-MWI1ZjExM2RmMGEzY2MzM2Y5ZDlhMGQ0MDk2NjdkMGE.-vto">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-y5v">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-zqx">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = ΣnΔG° ~f~ (products) – ΣnΔG° ~f~ (reactants)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWQwODJlMGIyNjFlMjc4Mjc5MTc4NTJlMmIwMmI2OTc.-1p5">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWQwODJlMGIyNjFlMjc4Mjc5MTc4NTJlMmIwMmI2OTc.-zvu">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = \[(-394.36 kJ/mol) + 2(-237.13 kJ/mol)\] – \[(-50.72 kJ/mol
+ 2(0 kJ/mol)\]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YTBlNjg2MDA2ZWJiNTJkZTMwMGRmZmM2ZjFhN2E0ZTk.-rya">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YTBlNjg2MDA2ZWJiNTJkZTMwMGRmZmM2ZjFhN2E0ZTk.-9dg">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = -868.62 kJ/mol – (-50.72 kJ/mol)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGU0ZmQ4MjY0MWZjMGVjNTE5ZTg1YmY3NDkyYzE5OTg.-6py">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGU0ZmQ4MjY0MWZjMGVjNTE5ZTg1YmY3NDkyYzE5OTg.-sza">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = -817.90 kJ/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The large negative value for ΔG° ~rxn~ indicates that the forward
reaction is heavily favored under standard conditions. This reaction
proceeds spontaneously in the forward direction.

## Gibbs Free Energy and Non-Standard Conditions {#20.html#x-ck12-R2liYnMgRnJlZSBFbmVyZ3kgYW5kIE5vbi1TdGFuZGFyZCBDb25kaXRpb25z_1-o28}

The sign of ΔG° predicts the behavior of a chemical reaction at the
standard conditions of 25°C and 1 atm of pressure. If ΔG° is negative,
the reaction will proceed spontaneously, if ΔG° is zero, the reaction is
at equilibrium, and if ΔG° is positive, the reaction will proceed
spontaneously in the *reverse* direction. However, this does not tell us
what will happen with a given reaction under non-standard conditions.

Consider the following reaction between ammonia and hydrogen chloride
gas:

<dl id="x-ck12-Njc4MWQ5ZDQxYjdhZDQ4YzEwZWU1ZWI4ODM3NzczNDA.-frf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Njc4MWQ5ZDQxYjdhZDQ4YzEwZWU1ZWI4ODM3NzczNDA.-ioa">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Njc4MWQ5ZDQxYjdhZDQ4YzEwZWU1ZWI4ODM3NzczNDA.-lpl">
<dd>
NH ~3~ (g) + HCl(g) → NH ~4~ Cl(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
We could calculate ΔG° ~rxn~ for this reaction using ΔG° ~f~ values, as
we did in the previous example problem, but that would only tell us the
value of ΔG at 25°C. Alternatively, we could calculate ΔG at other
temperatures using the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-y4q">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-dbn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-vpd">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = ΔH ~rxn~ - TΔS ~rxn~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Unlike ΔG, ΔH and ΔS do not vary much with changes in temperature. For
simplicity, we will assume that for a specified reaction the ΔH ~rxn~
and ΔS ~rxn~ values are the same at any temperature. By calculating ΔH
~rxn~ and ΔS ~rxn~ from the relevant standard enthalpy and entropy
values, we can calculate the value of ΔG at any temperature. Let's start
by finding ΔH ~rxn~ :

<dl id="x-ck12-ZTVjMmE0M2RlNDdiM2I1ZTI5M2RhZjUwMWQ1ZTgzOTE.-ckm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MzEwOGI1YjE1MzQwMDc4YTcwYWMyOGE5OTgzNDUzODc.-m3t">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MzEwOGI1YjE1MzQwMDc4YTcwYWMyOGE5OTgzNDUzODc.-0qk">
<dd>
ΔH° ~rxn~ = ΣnΔH° ~f~ (products) – ΣnΔH° ~f~ (reactants)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTRiNTk4YjQ3Njc1YTRkYzMzYzc5YmI2OTEwMmQxMzI.-zsu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTRiNTk4YjQ3Njc1YTRkYzMzYzc5YmI2OTEwMmQxMzI.-alp">
<dd>
ΔH° ~rxn~ = -315.39 kJ/mol – \[(-46.3 kJ/mol) + (-92.3 kJ/mol)\]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTM4ZWYxYTViNGU1YzEyYmZkZjg1OWM2MDAxYzhlYTQ.-w4j">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTM4ZWYxYTViNGU1YzEyYmZkZjg1OWM2MDAxYzhlYTQ.-hbe">
<dd>
ΔH° ~rxn~ = -176.70 kJ/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The large negative value indicates that this is a highly exothermic
reaction. Then, find ΔS ~rxn~ :

<dl id="x-ck12-ODkzYTU1NzYyYTc4ODZlYTQ4ZWQwNWMyMDJiNDg2ZmU.-u1l">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjU0NDMwZTdjYTFmNDlhMmFjYjgwMzRhNmRiMGI1Y2Y.-pr2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjU0NDMwZTdjYTFmNDlhMmFjYjgwMzRhNmRiMGI1Y2Y.-9ul">
<dd>
ΔS° ~rxn~ = ΣnS° ~f~ (products) – ΣnS° ~f~ (reactants)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTY5ZjhlMGU5OTVjMjFmODExZmFmMjQ1NTg0MGVlZDA.-roy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MTY5ZjhlMGU5OTVjMjFmODExZmFmMjQ1NTg0MGVlZDA.-9dp">
<dd>
ΔS° ~rxn~ = 94.6 J/K•mol – \[193.0 J/K•mol + 187.0 J/K•mol\]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWRmOWFiMzU4MjVhZmEyYzU5YzM1ZDFiODg0M2E0NGM.-rly">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWRmOWFiMzU4MjVhZmEyYzU5YzM1ZDFiODg0M2E0NGM.-tk7">
<dd>
ΔS° ~rxn~ = -285.4 J/K•mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
A negative value here indicates a decrease in entropy over the course of
the reaction. This is consistent with what we might expect for a
reaction in which two gases combine to make a single solid product.

Now, let's calculate the value of ΔG ~rxn~ for this reaction at a couple
of different temperatures. First, let's look at what we would get using
the standard temperature of 25°C (298 K). Before plugging any values
into our equation, we first need to make sure that our units match. Our
enthalpy value is written in terms of kilojoules (kJ), but the value for
entropy is written in terms of joules. One of these must be changed in
order to add the two quantities together. Because free energy changes
are usually written in units of kJ/mol, like enthalpy changes, we should
convert the value of ΔS° ~rxn~ from -285.4 J/K•mol to -0.2854 kJ/K•mol
by dividing by 1,000. Now, we can plug values into the following
equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-YWQyMmRkZTgzN2E1YzAzYzkwMTUwZDgxYmM2OWRhZDA.-dcv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-29t">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-pl9">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = ΔH ~rxn~ - TΔS ~rxn~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YTc5NTViNDIzMzJjN2EyMzEyMjI5NTcxZDE3NmY4Y2E.-md9">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YTc5NTViNDIzMzJjN2EyMzEyMjI5NTcxZDE3NmY4Y2E.-gps">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = -176.70 kJ/mol - (298 K)(-0.2854 kJ/K•mol)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjFmNTFlZDM1NTU0ZGNiZDhlOTIyYjMzMWU4ZDliNGE.-qx5">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjFmNTFlZDM1NTU0ZGNiZDhlOTIyYjMzMWU4ZDliNGE.-961">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = -176.70 kJ/mol - (-85.05 kJ/mol)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MDQyZWJjODM2YmNjODU1ZjdkOGZiZDk4N2QyZmU5NTY.-is6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MDQyZWJjODM2YmNjODU1ZjdkOGZiZDk4N2QyZmU5NTY.-wjg">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = -91.65 kJ/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
ΔG ~rxn~ &lt; 0, so this reaction would proceed spontaneously at a
temperature of 25°C. It should also be noted that, because we are using
the standard temperature at which thermodynamic data is generally
measured, this would be the approximate value obtained if we had
calculated ΔG ~rxn~ using ΔG° ~f~ values.

What if we increase the reaction temperature to 500°C (773 K)? The same
calculation can be performed at the new temperature:

<dl id="x-ck12-NzA4MjIxOTE4ZTU2YzE4YTliMjU3MDA2NWZkZmUwNGU.-tva">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-bdo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDZiNWFjNTJiMGZkY2RmODRhYzQ1NjdiY2UzZjFjZDQ.-prz">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = ΔH ~rxn~ - TΔS ~rxn~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGM1NzI1MTljMmJjMjkxMjE4NTNlMjIwYjdhNzM0MWU.-smn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGM1NzI1MTljMmJjMjkxMjE4NTNlMjIwYjdhNzM0MWU.-qx7">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = -176.70 kJ/mol - (773 K)(-0.2854 kJ/K•mol)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGI5OGQzZTNjMTIwOGE2MTUwNzlkY2NiNThjMjNjYjk.-lxq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGI5OGQzZTNjMTIwOGE2MTUwNzlkY2NiNThjMjNjYjk.-at4">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = -176.70 kJ/mol - (-220.61 kJ/mol)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmIyYjY1ZmYzZjdkMWNlZjVkOTA1YzVkYjMyN2E2MDE.-j21">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmIyYjY1ZmYzZjdkMWNlZjVkOTA1YzVkYjMyN2E2MDE.-g07">
<dd>
ΔG ~rxn~ = 43.91 kJ/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
At this temperature, the reaction would *not* be spontaneous in the
forward direction. However, the reverse reaction in which ΔG ~rxn~ =
-43.91 kJ/mol would be spontaneous at 500°C.

## Lesson Summary {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-rq4}

-   Gibbs free energy combines enthalpy and entropy into a single
    thermodynamic variable that can be used to predict whether a given
    reaction will occur spontaneously.
-   The sign of ΔG predicts the behavior of a chemical reaction at a
    constant temperature and pressure. If ΔG is negative, the forward
    reaction will proceed spontaneously, if ΔG is zero, the reaction is
    at equilibrium, and if ΔG is positive, the *reverse* reaction will
    be spontaneous.
-   ΔG ~rxn~ can be calculated at 25°C using ΔG° ~f~ values.
-   ΔG ~rxn~ can be calculated at other temperatures from the values of
    ΔH ~rxn~ and ΔS ~rxn~ .

## Lesson Review Questions {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-4hs}

1.  What thermodynamic quantities are used to define Gibbs free energy?
2.  Define each component of the equation describing Gibbs free energy.
3.  What is true for all spontaneous processes regarding Gibbs free
    energy equation?
4.  What is the change in Gibbs free energy for the formation of any
    element in its most stable state at 25degC?
5.  What can be inferred from a very large ΔG ~rxn~ ? From a very small
    ΔG ~rxn~ ?
6.  What does a ΔG value of zero imply?
7.  Describe how it is possible that a reaction is spontaneous at some
    temperatures but not at others.
8.  Use the table at
    [http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/GenChem-Textbook/The-Free-Energy-629.html](The-Free-Energy-629.html)
    to calculate ΔG° ~rxn~ for the following reactions at 25°C:
    1.  CaCO ~3~ (s) → CaO(s) + CO ~2~ (g)
    2.  2Mg(s) + O ~2~ (g) → 2MgO(s)
    3.  2SO ~2~ (g) + O ~2~ (g) → 2SO ~3~ (g)
    4.  2C ~2~ H ~6~ (g) + 7O ~2~ (g) → 4CO ~2~ (g) + 6H ~2~ O(l)

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#20.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-1ji}

-   Gibbs free energy:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/ch21/gibbs.php](gibbs.php)
-   ΔG values:
    [http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/GenChem-Textbook/The-Free-Energy-629.html](The-Free-Energy-629.html)

## Points to Consider {#20.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-sq5}

-   How does the equilibrium of a reaction affect the free energy?
-   Can we use free energy calculations to determine equilibrium
    constants?
-   Can we use equilibrium constants to determine free energy changes?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686159] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686160] -->

# Free Energy and Equilibrium {#20.html#x-ck12-RnJlZSBFbmVyZ3kgYW5kIEVxdWlsaWJyaXVt}

## Lesson Objectives {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-pvu}

-   Use the reaction quotient to determine which direction a reaction
    must run in order to reach equilibrium.
-   Use the equilibrium constant of a reaction to calculate the change
    in Gibbs free energy.
-   Use changes in Gibbs free energy to calculate equilibrium constants.
-   Predict whether the reactants or products of a reaction are favored
    under a given set of conditions by looking at either the equilibrium
    constant or the change in Gibbs free energy.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-n8g}

-   **reaction quotient (Q)** : The ratio of the reactant and product
    concentrations in their non-equilibrium states, raised to their
    respective exponents.

## Check Your Understanding {#20.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-a73}

-   What data is needed to calculate the change in Gibbs free energy for
    a reaction?
-   What information is needed to calculate an equilibrium constant?

## The Reaction Quotient {#20.html#x-ck12-VGhlIFJlYWN0aW9uIFF1b3RpZW50_2-zog}

In the previous chapter, we learned how to set up an equilibrium
constant expression. For the generic reaction shown below, the
equilibrium constant expression is constructed as follows:

![aA+bB & \\rightleftarrows cC+dD \\\\\\K\_{eq}
&=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/79fc1154bd857b1c697e7907086ad156.png)

It should be emphasized that the equation above is only true when the
reaction is at equilibrium. Given enough time, the indicated ratio of
concentrations will eventually converge on the equilibrium constant, but
for any reaction in which net changes are still occurring, this equation
is not true. For a reaction that is still in progress, it is often
useful to calculate the same ratio of concentrations, but in a
non-equilibrium state. This value is called the **reaction quotient**
(Q), and comparing the value of Q to the value of K ~eq~ tells us which
direction the reaction needs to shift in order to reach equilibrium.

<dl id="x-ck12-MzY5ZjVlMjExYjE0MTYxZjNhNzExNzViZGNmY2NjOGQ.-emu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-N2E1Y2E1Y2E3M2ViZGFjZTUxYTdiNzczYWUwNmJlNDg.-fkf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-N2E1Y2E1Y2E3M2ViZGFjZTUxYTdiNzczYWUwNmJlNDg.-hib">
<dd>
![K\_{eq}=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/e4af654f48331d2dfe83b82336c031f0.png)
(Only if the reaction is at equilibrium)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjhlZWM0NjQzN2MzODRkOGRhZDE4ZDU0NjRlYmMzNWM.-ghp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjhlZWM0NjQzN2MzODRkOGRhZDE4ZDU0NjRlYmMzNWM.-0fa">
<dd>
![Q=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b}](ck12_math_images_dir/132b8884a6468a613b302bcca5ee11d0.png)
(Always)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If Q &gt; K ~eq~ , then the concentrations of the products (in the
numerator) are too large compared to the concentrations of the
reactants. Therefore, the reverse reaction must be favored (reducing the
products and generating more reactants) in order for the reaction to
achieve equilibrium. If Q &lt; K ~eq~ , the situation is reversed. There
are too many reactants and not enough products, so the reaction quotient
is a small number compared to K ~eq~ , and the forward reaction will be
favored until equilibrium is reached. When Q = K ~eq~ , the reaction is
at equilibrium.

## Free Energy at Non-Standard Concentrations {#20.html#x-ck12-RnJlZSBFbmVyZ3kgYXQgTm9uLVN0YW5kYXJkIENvbmNlbnRyYXRpb25z_2-2p4}

In the previous section, we looked at values for ΔG°, which tells us the
free energy change for a reaction being run at standard conditions. In
addition to the requirements for temperature and pressure (25°C and 1
atm), standard conditions also specify the concentrations of each
reaction component. Under standard conditions, the concentration of each
reaction component in the aqueous or gaseous states is exactly 1 M.

Plugging a value of 1 M in for every concentration in the reaction
quotient expression will give us a value of Q = 1. Unless K ~eq~ happens
to be exactly 1, reaction mixtures are not at equilibrium under standard
conditions. However, we can calculate the value of ΔG for any
combination of concentrations if we know the values of ΔG° and Q. The
following equation (which we will not derive) shows the relationships
between these quantities:

ΔG = ΔG° + RT ln Q

-   ΔG = free energy change of the reaction under existing conditions
-   ΔG° = free energy change of the reaction under standard-state
    conditions
-   R = universal gas constant (8.314 J/K•mol)
-   T = absolute temperature (in Kelvin)
-   Q = reaction quotient

Although ΔG° is going to be a fixed value for a given temperature, ΔG
will vary depending on the value of RT ln Q.

## Free Energy and the Equilibrium Constant {#20.html#x-ck12-RnJlZSBFbmVyZ3kgYW5kIHRoZSBFcXVpbGlicml1bSBDb25zdGFudA.._2-fix}

At equilibrium, the forward and reverse reactions proceed at equal
rates. The driving force in each direction is equal, because the free
energy of the reactants and products under equilibrium conditions is
equivalent (ΔG = 0). We also know that, at equilibrium, Q = K ~eq~ . For
a reaction that has reached equilibrium, the equation above becomes the
following:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZjYwMzMzNDhkMjZiZTVmODUxZmRjODMyNTBkMzZhYjA.-q8p">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjcwNzJkN2ZmZGMzY2JiYzBjZGJlOTRlZjQ3YzhjMjk.-sxv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjcwNzJkN2ZmZGMzY2JiYzBjZGJlOTRlZjQ3YzhjMjk.-otk">
<dd>
ΔG = ΔG° + RT ln Q

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTIxODliZGZlNzNhMzk0MDNhMjgyNWI3ZjEyZjAyNzA.-clv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTIxODliZGZlNzNhMzk0MDNhMjgyNWI3ZjEyZjAyNzA.-vb9">
<dd>
0 = ΔG° + RT ln K

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjhhYzUxYzBkNjA2YzZkODVhMTE3MmI3N2Y3YzIwZTE.-dlg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjhhYzUxYzBkNjA2YzZkODVhMTE3MmI3N2Y3YzIwZTE.-mgr">
<dd>
ΔG° = - RT ln K

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This equation provides us with a way to convert between ΔG° and the
equilibrium constant for a given reaction. Knowing either ΔG° or K ~eq~
tells us whether the reactants or products are favored at equilibrium.
This relationship is summarized in the following table:

  K        ln K       ΔG°        Comments
  -------- ---------- ---------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
  &lt; 1   negative   positive   reactants favored over products at equilibrium
  1        0          0          equilibrium situation; products and reactants equally favored
  &gt;1    positive   negative   products favored over reactants at equilibrium

**Example 20.4**

The standard free energy of formation (∆G° ~f~ ) for ammonia is -16.6
kJ/mol. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the following reaction at
25°C (298 K):

<dl id="x-ck12-NWU5YjA3NjVkNjIyMzczNjE4YTI2NDIwMmNkMTgzOWE.-b6c">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWU5YjA3NjVkNjIyMzczNjE4YTI2NDIwMmNkMTgzOWE.-k7i">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWU5YjA3NjVkNjIyMzczNjE4YTI2NDIwMmNkMTgzOWE.-c13">
<dd>
N ~2~ (g) + 3H ~2~ (g)
![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
2NH ~3~ (g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
*Answer:*

If we know the value of ∆G° for this reaction, we can calculate the
equilibrium constant using the equation above. ∆G° can be calculated
from ∆G° ~f~ values using the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-59i">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-yfs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-eft">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = ΣnΔG° ~f~ (products) – ΣnΔG° ~f~ (reactants)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because nitrogen and hydrogen are both in their standard elemental
states, they have ΔG° ~f~ values of zero.

<dl id="x-ck12-N2EyYTY3NDNiN2UxOGRmNDQ0YzZjZmYzOGFmMzY5ZmI.-8iw">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-epa">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjI3ZjczMTVmOGZjOGVjYjA2ZWZlMTY1MzdiNTcxYjA.-hyt">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = ΣnΔG° ~f~ (products) – ΣnΔG° ~f~ (reactants)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWM1YTE2MTc5MTAxZmZhMWM3MTQyZjQ0NmI4NmFiYzA.-ula">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWM1YTE2MTc5MTAxZmZhMWM3MTQyZjQ0NmI4NmFiYzA.-vxq">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = 2(-16.6 kJ/mol) - \[(0 kJ/mol) + 3(0 kJ/mol)\]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmM5N2Q0ZmViNGZjZWU2YzU3NDhiZDdkNTFhNDI3YmM.-mty">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmM5N2Q0ZmViNGZjZWU2YzU3NDhiZDdkNTFhNDI3YmM.-itg">
<dd>
ΔG° ~rxn~ = -33.2 kJ/mol

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Then solve ΔG° = - RT ln K ~eq~ for K ~eq~ :

<dl id="x-ck12-eqp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-evb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-pfx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\\Delta G \^\\circ=-RT \\ ln \\
K\_{eq}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3c3ca8e296369e3450deb82d5bb164e0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gwo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-tpg">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{ln \\ K\_{eq}= - \\frac{\\Delta G
\^\\circ}{RT}}](ck12_math_images_dir/7cd0369d9bef5af05e0d679e2cda7e90.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gfm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-6tb">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_{eq} = e\^{- \\frac{\\Delta G
\^\\circ}{RT}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/ef45bddb95b758d0927dc6318872ffd7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Before plugging values into this equation, note that we are using a
value of 8.314 J/K•mol for R, but our value for ΔG° is -33.2 kJ/mol. In
order for our units to cancel correctly, we need to convert -33.2 kJ/mol
to -33,200 J/mol. Then, K ~eq~ can be calculated as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-vzo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lcm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gme">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_{eq} = e\^{- \\frac{\\Delta G
\^\\circ}{RT}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/ef45bddb95b758d0927dc6318872ffd7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-pwk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-tzw">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_{eq} = e\^{- \\frac{-33,200 \\ J/mol}{(8.314 \\ J/K\\cdot
mol)(298 \\
K)}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/b138d6980519a914d76ef012f44fa2ec.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-viu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lq0">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_{eq} =
e\^{13.4}}](ck12_math_images_dir/50c28a2e7a8e86749b73fef6cb88ccdf.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-x1y">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hd3">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_{eq} = 6.6 \\times
10\^5}](ck12_math_images_dir/a45705a70a7d1bc7375f7b61ed326b66.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
K ~eq~ is very large, indicating that the products are heavily favored
at 25°C.

<div
id="20.html#x-ck12-MWIwOGI3NjYwM2Y0YzIwOWZmYjFlZTI4YzIyNThhZTY.-bqr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:JGvBerkel/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Haber_Ammonia.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_20_files/20151009235400852724.jpeg)

**Figure 20.4**

</div>

Looking at the equation above, we see that increasing the temperature
for any reaction makes the fraction in the exponent smaller, thus moving
the equilibrium constant closer to 1. If we were to run the ammonia
formation reaction above, known as the Haber process, at a higher
temperature, the equilibrium constant would be smaller, and the desired
products would be less favored. However, the industrial manufacture of
ammonia uses this reaction at temperatures of 400-450°C. Why are
elevated temperatures used? Knowing whether reactants or products are
energetically favored is one important factor for optimizing production
of a desired product, but it is not the only relevant variable. As it
turns out, this reaction is quite slow, so even if the products are
heavily favored at equilibrium, it takes a long time to reach that
equilibrium. Increasing the temperature speeds up the reaction, and this
advantage makes up for the slightly less favorable equilibrium constant.

**Example 20.5**

The equilibrium constant for the following reaction is 1.6 × 10 ^-10^ at
25°C:

<dl id="x-ck12-NDdlNDc5ZWE1OTQxZTY4ODY1ZDI0ZTNjNWE4MzJiMmE.-lna">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDdlNDc5ZWE1OTQxZTY4ODY1ZDI0ZTNjNWE4MzJiMmE.-qvv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDdlNDc5ZWE1OTQxZTY4ODY1ZDI0ZTNjNWE4MzJiMmE.-7qu">
<dd>
AgCl(s)
![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
Ag ^+^ (aq) + Cl ^-^ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Calculate ΔG°.

*Answer:*

Simply plug the relevant values into the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-fsh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fam">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-w5q">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\\Delta G \^\\circ=-RT \\ ln \\
K\_{eq}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3c3ca8e296369e3450deb82d5bb164e0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gkm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-abl">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\\Delta G \^\\circ=-(8.314 \\ J/K\\cdot mol)(298 \\ K) \\ ln
\\ (1.6 \\times
10\^{-10})}](ck12_math_images_dir/1612ff6f9168e140c3bcfd778bf51bf8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-axo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-81h">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\\Delta G \^\\circ=-55,884 \\
J/mol}](ck12_math_images_dir/c2a4313ac553214664ea453beb53e812.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Note that the answer will be in J/mol (not kJ/mol) if we cancel the
units correctly. Rounding the correct number of significant figures and
converting to the usual units for free energy values, ΔG° = 56 kJ/mol
for this reaction. This is a very large number, indicating that the
reactants are highly favored, as would be expected for a relatively
insoluble ionic compound.

<div
id="20.html#x-ck12-MjY2ZjRlMGMyNzEwNWVhNGM3NjJjYjAyODMzZmU5MGE.-cfl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Silver%28I%29_chloride.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_20_files/20151009235400990679.jpeg)

**Figure 20.5**

</div>

One type of equilibrium that we will be studying extensively in the
following chapter is the ionization of an acid in water:

<dl id="x-ck12-l9o">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-din">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-oe0">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{HA(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
A\^-(aq)+H\_3O\^+(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/f235fe053509cd625589f484a087a11e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where HA is a generic acid, and A ^-^ is its conjugate base.

## Lesson Summary {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-dep}

-   The reaction quotient can be compared to the equilibrium constant to
    determine which direction a reaction will shift in order to
    reach equilibrium.
-   Gibbs free energy values can be used to determine
    equilibrium constants.
-   Equilibrium constants can be used to calculate changes in Gibbs
    free energy.
-   Equilibrium constants and Gibbs free energy values allow us to
    predict the extent to which reactants or products will be favored
    once a reaction reaches equilibrium.

## Lesson Review Questions {#20.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-yrq}

1.  What is the difference between the equilibrium constant and the
    reaction quotient?
2.  In which direction will the reaction proceed based on the three
    following conditions?
    1.  Q&gt;K ~eq~
    2.  Q&lt;K ~eq~
    3.  Q=K ~eq~

3.  What conditions does the notation ΔG° imply? Explain the difference
    between ΔG° and ΔG.
4.  Define each value in the equation that relates ΔG° and ΔG.
5.  How can ΔG° or K ~eq~ be used to tell whether reactants or products
    are favored at equilibrium?
6.  Calculate ΔG° for the process 2H ~2~ O(l)
    ![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
    H ~3~ O ^+^ (aq) + OH ^-^ (aq) if the equilibrium constant at 25°C
    is 1×10 ^-14^ .
7.  Calculate ΔG° and K ~eq~ for the following reaction at 25°C: 2H
    ~2~ O(g)
    ![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
    2H ~2~ (g) + O ~2~ (g)
8.  Calculate the equilibrium constant for the following reaction at
    25°C: 2O ~3~ (g)
    ![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
    3O ~2~ (g)
9.  Calculate ΔG° for the ionization of acetic acid (CH ~3~ CO ~2~ H).
    The equilibrium constant for the following reaction is 1.8 × 10 ^-5^
    :

<dl id="x-ck12-xdr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-653">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-oco">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{CH\_3CO\_2H(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
CH\_3CO\_2\^-(aq)+H\_3O\^+(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/2aa7d86bfb27b3309810d2a3b74eb7e5.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#20.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-onq}

-   Gibbs free energy and equilibrium:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/ch21/gibbs.php\#relation](gibbs.php#relation)
-   More equilibrium material:
    [http://www.science.uwaterloo.ca/\~cchieh/cact/applychem/gibbsenergy.html](gibbsenergy.html)

## Points to Consider {#20.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-ed5}

-   How do equilibrium processes influence the behavior of acids and
    bases?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686160] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#20.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-kfr}

1.  Courtesy of NOAA.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:NOAA\_arctic\_spring\_1950\_corp1104.jpg](File:NOAA_arctic_spring_1950_corp1104.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  User:MONGO/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Steamboat\_Geyser.jpg](File:Steamboat_Geyser.jpg) .
    Public Domain
3.  J. Willard Gibbs.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gibbs\_Josiah\_Willard.jpg](File:Gibbs_Josiah_Willard.jpg) .
    Public Domain
4.  User:JGvBerkel/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Haber\_Ammonia.JPG](File:Haber_Ammonia.JPG) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Silver%28I%29\_chloride.JPG](File:Silver%28I%29_chloride.JPG) .
    Public Domain

<span id="21.html"></span>

# Acids and Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-QWNpZHMgYW5kIEJhc2Vz-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412089757.jpeg)
</span>

Aqua regia, a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid, is one of
the few materials that will dissolve gold. This material, translated to
"royal water" in English, was named so because it could dissolve the
royal metal gold. First noted in the fourteenth century, aqua regia
could be used to help ascertain whether a particular material was
actually gold or was some trickery of the alchemist. Nitric acid by
itself will not dissolve gold, but will in combination with hydrochloric
acid. The chemistry of the process is rather complex, with both acids
reacting with the metal to form soluble gold compounds. The gold can be
recovered from the solution, making the process useful for purification
purposes.

Acids and bases have had many uses throughout history. In this chapter
we want to explore the properties of acids and bases and the reactions
in which they take part.

^User:Yugo312/Wikimedia\\ Commons.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%E7%8E%8B%E6%B0%B4.JPG.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686162] -->

# Acid-Base Definitions {#21.html#x-ck12-QWNpZC1CYXNlIERlZmluaXRpb25z}

## Lesson Objectives {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-kae}

-   List some common properties of acids and bases.
-   Describe how acids and bases are defined based on the Arrhenius,
    Bronsted-Lowry, and Lewis definitions. Understand the differences
    between these three systems.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-msx}

-   **Arrhenius acid** : A compound that releases H ^+^ ions when
    dissolved in water.
-   **Arrhenius base** : A compound that generates hydroxide ions (OH
    ^-^ ) when dissolved in water.
-   **Brønsted-Lowry acid** : A compound that can donate a proton (an H
    ^+^ ion) to an appropriate acceptor.
-   **Brønsted-Lowry base** : A compound that can remove a proton from a
    relatively strong Brønsted-Lowry acid.
-   **Lewis acid** : A chemical species that accepts a pair
    of electrons.
-   **Lewis base** : A chemical species that donates a pair
    of electrons.
-   **monoprotic acid** : A compound with only one acidic hydrogen atom
    that can be transferred to a strong base.
-   **polyprotic acid** : A compound with two or more acidic hydrogen
    atoms that can be transferred to a strong base.

## Check Your Understanding {#21.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-4nx}

-   What comes to mind when you think of acids? How does a base differ
    from an acid?

## Introduction {#21.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-53d}

When you think of acids, "sour" is likely to come to mind. For the
ancient Greeks, "sour-tasting" is in fact what defined a category of
substances which later became known as acids. Bases were first
categorized by their uses in soaps, as well as their ability to
counteract properties of acids. In this lesson, you will learn about a
few definitions for acids and bases as well as some of their properties.

## Properties of Acids and Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-UHJvcGVydGllcyBvZiBBY2lkcyBhbmQgQmFzZXM.-hkd}

Acids and bases are versatile and useful materials in many chemical
reactions. Some properties that are common to aqueous solutions of acids
and bases are listed in **Table**
[below](#21.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MjEuMQ..) .

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Acids                                Bases
  ------------------------------------ ------------------------------------
  conduct electricity in solution      conduct electricity in solution

  turn blue litmus paper red           turn red litmus paper blue

  have a sour taste                    have a slippery feeling

  react with bases to create a neutral react with acids to create a neutral
  solution                             solution

  react with active metals to produce  
  hydrogen gas                         
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note: Litmus paper is a type of treated paper that changes color based
on the acidity of the solution it comes in contact with.

## Defining Acids and Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-RGVmaW5pbmcgQWNpZHMgYW5kIEJhc2Vz-cvh}

An early way of classifying acids and bases was proposed by Svante
Arrhenius, a Swedish chemist, in 1894. An **Arrhenius acid** is any
compound that releases H ^+^ ions when dissolved in water. An
**Arrhenius base** is a compound that generates hydroxide ions (OH ^-^ )
when dissolved in water. Some representative examples are given in the
**Table** [below](#21.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MjEuMg..) .

  Acids                                         Bases
  --------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
  hydrochloric acid: HCl → H ^+^ + Cl ^-^       sodium hydroxide: NaOH → Na ^+^ + OH ^-^
  nitric acid: HNO ^3\\ →\\ H^ + + NO ~3~ ^-^   potassium hydroxide: KOH → K ^+^ + OH ^-^
  hydrobromic acid: HBr → H ^+^ + Br ^-^        calcium hydroxide: Ca(OH) ~2~ → Ca ^2+^ + 2 OH ^-^

Many strong acids and bases can be identified based on the Arrhenius
model. However, there are many compounds that share a number of common
characteristics with acids and bases but do not fit the Arrhenius
definitions. In the early 1920s, the Danish scientist Johannes Brønsted
and the English researcher Thomas Lowry each published ideas that
expanded the Arrhenius concept. According to this newer definition, a
**Brønsted-Lowry acid** is any compound that can donate a proton (an H
^+^ ion) to an appropriate acceptor. A **Brønsted-Lowry base** is a
compound that can remove (or accept) a proton from a relatively
Brønsted-Lowry acid.

Overall, the Brønsted-Lowry model suggested that any acid-base reaction
could be reduced to the transfer of a proton from an acid to a base. For
example, the reaction between hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium
bicarbonate (NaHCO ~3~ ) involves the transfer of an H ^+^ ion from the
acid (HCl) to the base (the bicarbonate ion). The resulting carbonic
acid (H ~2~ CO ~3~ ) is unstable and breaks down to form carbon dioxide
and water:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412245053.png)
</span>

Another more general definition of acids and bases was offered by the
American chemist G.N. Lewis. A **Lewis acid** is any chemical species
that accepts a pair of electrons, and a **Lewis base** is a chemical
species that donates a pair of electrons. This is the broadest most
commonly used definition, and all compounds that qualify as an acid or
base under the previous definitions are also Lewis acids and bases.

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412370480.png)
</span>

In the diagram above, we see the same process illustrated multiple
times, highlighting the ways in which the compounds are acting as an
acid or a base according to each definition. According to the
Brønsted-Lowry model, the protonated water molecule (the acid) is
donating a proton to the OH ^-^ ion (the base). According to the Lewis
model, the hydroxide ion has a pair of electrons (indicated by the black
bar) that it donates to the protonated water molecule. "Pronated" refers
to the extra hydrogen atom in the molecule, which increases its charge
from neutral to +1. In both instances, the hydroxide ion serves as a
base and the protonated water molecule is the acid.

An example of a Lewis acid-base reaction that would not fit the other
definitions of acid and base is the formation of an adduct between boron
trifluoride and ammonia:

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-NjQzMmJkZjBlOTA4YWZlMWIwODVlN2FjODUzM2Y3NjM.-xhi"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412489755.png)

**Figure 21.1**

</div>

The ammonia serves as a Lewis base by donating its lone pair of
electrons to make a new bond with boron (the Lewis acid), which has an
empty orbital (indicated by
![\\circ](ck12_math_images_dir/2fb25815ee96d405b7780f3721a3573d.png) )
that can accept two electrons.

Unless otherwise indicated, we will be using the Brønsted-Lowry model of
acids and bases for the remainder of the chapter.

### Monoprotic and Polyprotic Acids {#21.html#x-ck12-TW9ub3Byb3RpYyBhbmQgUG9seXByb3RpYyBBY2lkcw..-9do}

Acids can further be categorized based on how many acidic hydrogen atoms
they contain. Acidic hydrogen atoms are those which will be transferred
to a base. A **monoprotic acid** has only one acidic hydrogen that would
be transferred to a strong base, whereas a **polyprotic acid** has two
or more. Common monoprotic acids include HCl, HBr, and HNO ~3~ . A
common diprotic acid is sulfuric acid (H ~2~ SO ~4~ ), and phosphoric
acid (H ~3~ PO ~4~ ) provides an example of a triprotic acid. In each
case, all hydrogens are available to participate in acid-base reactions.
However, that is not the case for all acidic molecules. For example, in
acetic acid (CH ~3~ COOH), only the hydrogen bonded to the oxygen atom
is acidic. The other three hydrogens are covalently bonded to carbon and
cannot be removed by any of the bases that we will consider in this
chapter.

  Name                Structure
  ------------------- -------------
  hydrobromic acid    HBr
  hydrochloric acid   HCl
  hydrofluoric acid   HF
  hydroiodic acid     HI
  nitric acid         HNO ~3~
  perchloric acid     HClO ~4~
  acetic acid         CH ~3~ COOH

  Name             Structure
  ---------------- --------------
  carbonic acid    H ~2~ CO ~3~
  sulfuric acid    H ~2~ SO ~4~
  sulfurous acid   H ~2~ SO ~3~

  Name              Structure
  ----------------- --------------
  phosphoric acid   H ~3~ PO ~4~

## Lesson Summary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-dy7}

-   Acids and bases were originally identified based on their physical
    and chemical properties.
-   According to the Arrhenius model, acids and bases are compounds that
    release H ^+^ or OH ^-^ ions when dissolved in water.
-   In the Brønsted-Lowry model, an acid is a compound that can donate a
    proton (H ^+^ ion), and a base is a compound that can accept
    a proton.
-   A Lewis base is an electron-pair donor, whereas a Lewis acid is an
    electron-pair acceptor. This is the broadest of the
    three definitions.
-   Acids can be classified as monoprotic or polyprotic based on the
    number of acidic hydrogens they contain.

## Lesson Review Questions {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-5kg}

1.  List three characteristics exhibited by acids and three exhibited
    by bases.
2.  Based on the given acid and base characteristics, can you think of a
    few substances that might be classified as acids and a few that
    might be classified as bases?
3.  Based on Arrhenius' definitions, how can you tell the difference
    between an acidic substance and a basic substance?
4.  Why were Arrhenius' definitions expanded upon?
5.  Based on Brønsted-Lowry definitions, how can you tell the difference
    between an acidic substance and a basic substance?
6.  What definition is most widely applicable in defining acids and
    bases?
7.  Describe the difference between a monoprotic acid and a
    polyprotic acid.
8.  The formula for propanoic acid is CH ~3~ CH ~2~ COOH. Is this acid
    monoprotic or polyprotic? Explain your answer.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#21.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-tfi}

-   Summary of acid and base properties:
    [http://www.chemtutor.com/acid.htm](acid.htm)
-   Strong and weak acids and bases:
    [http://www.highlands.edu/academics/divisions/scipe/chemistry/Site/GHandouts\_files/Strong%20and%20Weak%20Acids%20and%20Bases.pdf](Strong%20and%20Weak%20Acids%20and%20Bases.pdf)

## Points to Consider {#21.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-bek}

-   How can we tell how acidic or basic a solution is?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686162] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686163] -->

# The pH Concept {#21.html#x-ck12-VGhlIHBIIENvbmNlcHQ.}

## Lesson Objectives {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-37g}

-   Describe the self-ionization of water, and calculate the equilibrium
    constant for this reaction.
-   Define pH.
-   List the pH values of some common materials.
-   Calculate pH when given the concentration of hydrogen ions.
-   Calculate the concentration of hydrogen ions when given the pH of
    a solution.
-   Describe ways of measuring the pH of a solution.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-5s3}

-   **amphoteric** : A substance that can act as both an acid and
    a base.
-   **neutral solution** : An aqueous solution in which \[H ~3~ O ^+^ \]
    = \[OH ^-^ \].
-   **acidic solution** : An aqueous solution in which \[H ~3~ O ^+^
    \] &gt; \[OH ^-^ \].
-   **basic solution** : An aqueous solution in which \[H ~3~ O ^+^ \]
    &lt; \[OH ^-^ \].
-   **pH** : A measure of the concentration of hydrogen atoms in
    solution; ![pH = - log
    \[H\^+\]](ck12_math_images_dir/0206ae0377fa762610730ba2189e52f4.png) .
-   **acid-base indicator** : A substance which changes color based on
    the relative acidity of the solution.

## Check Your Understanding {#21.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-ckr}

-   Based on what you know about acids and bases, would you expect an
    acidic solution to have a high or low concentration of H ^+^ ions?

## Self-Ionization of Water {#21.html#x-ck12-U2VsZi1Jb25pemF0aW9uIG9mIFdhdGVy_1-lqk}

Water is an example of what is known as an **amphoteric** substance,
which means that it can act as both an acid and a base. In the presence
of a strong acid, water can be a proton acceptor (a base), producing the
hydronium ion (H ~3~ O ^+^ ):

<dl id="x-ck12-mkt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-61w">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-5vq">
<dd>
![HCl(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\to
Cl\^-(aq)+H\_3O\^+(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/3bad71d661fa1093f84c6ab3a7ed8fc0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
However, water can also donate a proton (acting as an acid) when
combined with a strong enough base, producing the hydroxide ion (OH ^-^
):

<dl id="x-ck12-x62">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2wi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-pqk">
<dd>
![CH\_3O\^-(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
CH\_3OH(aq)+OH\^-(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/17952af23163bb3a800c881ef8ff3e4a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Overall, water is a weak acid and a weak base. Because it has both of
these properties, any sample of liquid water undergoes the following
acid-based reaction in which both hydronium and hydroxide ions are
produced to a very small extent:

<dl id="x-ck12-bu8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-5bh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-z5x">
<dd>
![H\_2O(l)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
H\_3O\^+(aq)+OH\^-(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/d743d6e6479f0ec4fc2f2c58c15ad793.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because the reactants are in the liquid phase, they are not included in
the equilibrium constant expression. As a result, the value of K ~eq~
for this reaction can be calculated as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-wd8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-sfq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fis">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_{eq}=\[H\_3O\^+\]\[OH\^-\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/cead1988da39eaca2f89bdc27137acc1.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Water's ability to act as an acid or a base is relatively weak, so we
would expect the reactants to be heavily favored in this equilibrium.
Indeed, at 25°C, this equilibrium constant has a value of only 1.0 × 10
^-14^ . However, despite the minimal extent of self-ionization, this is
a fundamentally important equilibrium for any reactions that take place
in water, which includes essentially all biochemical reactions that
occur inside any living organism. Because of its particular importance,
this equilibrium constant is given the special symbol K ~w~ .

In a pure sample of water, there are no external sources of H ~3~ O ^+^
or OH ^-^ (no additional acids or bases), so for each H ~3~ O ^+^ ion
that is formed by the self-ionization of water, an OH ^-^ ion will be
formed as well. As a result, \[H ~3~ O ^+^ \] = \[OH ^-^ \] in pure
water. Because both of these concentrations are the same, we can solve
for the equilibrium concentrations using the value of K ~w~ . Let *x* be
the concentration of H ~3~ O ^+^ (and therefore also the concentration
of OH ^-^ ):

![\\mathrm{K\_w} &= \\mathrm{\[H\_3O\^+\]\[OH\^-\]} \\\\\\1.0 \\times
10\^{-14} &= \[x\]\[x\] \\\\\\1.0 \\times 10\^{-14} &= x\^2 \\\\\\1.0
\\times 10\^{-7} &= x
](ck12_math_images_dir/2cdce58ebdf652ff5805780856feb12d.png)

At equilibrium, \[H ~3~ O ^+^ \] = \[OH ^-^ \] = 1.0 × 10 ^-7^ in a
sample of pure water. An aqueous solution in which \[H ~3~ O ^+^ \] =
\[OH ^-^ \] is referred to as a **neutral solution** . However, the
addition of an external acid or base will shift the relative amounts of
these two ions. Adding an acid will increase the amount of H ~3~ O ^+^ .
As a consequence, the amount of OH ^-^ will need to decrease in order to
reestablish equilibrium (at which point the equilibrium expression for K
~w~ will once again have the correct value). In an **acidic solution** ,
\[H ~3~ O ^+^ \] &gt; \[OH ^-^ \]. Similarly, in a **basic solution** ,
the amount of OH ^-^ will increase and the amount of H ~3~ O ^+^ will
decrease, so \[H ~3~ O ^+^ \] &lt; \[OH ^-^ \].

### Shorthand Notation for Aqueous Acids {#21.html#x-ck12-U2hvcnRoYW5kIE5vdGF0aW9uIGZvciBBcXVlb3VzIEFjaWRz_1-myp}

It is very common for chemists to write H ^+^ instead of H ~3~ O ^+^
when talking about aqueous solutions of acids and bases. However, H ^+^
will not exist as an isolated ion if dissolved in water. Instead, it
will be closely associated with (at least) one molecule of the solvent.
It is generally acceptable to use H ^+^ , but it should be understood
that this is just a shorthand notation for H ~3~ O ^+^ . Consequently,
the expression for K ~w~ is often written as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-ie9">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-vzf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-k6f">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_w=\[H\^+\]\[OH\^-\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/9e4f8f8010394d78a7a05faf4bd2dc4a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Acid-base reactions are also sometimes written in a way that makes use
of this shorthand. For example, you might see the following
acid-dissociation reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-l8b">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fli">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-a05">
<dd>
![HNO\_3(aq) \\to
H\^+(aq)+NO\_3\^-(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/586237362184a219f21a5723dcc0228c.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
However, a better description of this process would be the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-lnd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-x1l">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-cak">
<dd>
![HNO\_3(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\to
H\_3O\^+(aq)+NO\_3\^-(aq)](ck12_math_images_dir/b97e26da8b907db34fcf01933feadf9d.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
H ^+^ is not just "falling off" of nitric acid. Instead, it is being
pulled off by water, which is a better base than the resulting nitrate
anion. Again, the shorthand version is acceptable to use, but keep in
mind that a more accurate description would include water as a base
whenever "H ^+^ " is being generated in an aqueous solution.

## pH of Aqueous Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-cEggb2YgQXF1ZW91cyBTb2x1dGlvbnM._1-3qg}

Because we are dealing with such small concentrations of H ^+^ and OH
^-^ , a system was invented in order to talk about the acidity or
basicity of a solution that uses more manageable numbers. The Danish
chemist Søren Sørenson proposed a new quantity that he called **pH** ,
which is defined as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-9rl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fn6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jss">
<dd>
![pH = - log
\[H\^+\]](ck12_math_images_dir/0206ae0377fa762610730ba2189e52f4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
One of the confusing consequences of pH values as defined by this
equation is that the higher the hydrogen ion concentration, the lower
the pH. A solution with a hydrogen ion concentration of 1 × 10 ^-3^
would have a pH of 3, and a solution with a hydrogen ion concentration
of 1 × 10 ^-5^ would have a pH value of 5.

**Example 21.1**

What is the pH of a neutral solution (at 25°C)?

*Answer:*

As we saw in the previous section, a neutral solution has a hydrogen ion
concentration of 1.0 × 10 ^-7^ .

![pH &= - log \[H\^+\] \\\\\\pH &= - log \[1.0 \\times 10\^{-7}\]
\\\\\\pH
&=7.00](ck12_math_images_dir/59fd2ee85c889f4eac5a273d51174af0.png)

A neutral solution has a pH of 7. Acidic solutions have higher
concentrations of H ^+^ , so they have pH values that are less than 7.
Conversely, basic solutions have lower concentrations of H ^+^ and pH
values greater than 7.

Here is a list of the pH values for some common acidic and basic
solutions:

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-N2U0Yjk5ZTUzMTQ2NzY2ZGNlODVjMmI1MWIyMDc3ZDY.-min"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Hana Zavadska and Zachary Wilson" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412612715.png)

**Figure 21.2**

</div>

**Example 21.2**

What is the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution that has a pH
value of 4.67?

*Answer:*

Start with the definition of pH and plug in the known value:

![\\text{pH} &= - \\log \[\\text{H}\^+\] \\\\\\4.67 &= - \\log
\[\\text{H}\^+\]](ck12_math_images_dir/4b3845eefc646a81214df7eddaa0dcc3.png)

The logarithm function can be inverted as follows:

![- \\log \[\\text{H}\^+\] &=4.67 \\\\\\\\log \[\\text{H}\^+\] &=-4.67
\\\\\\10\^{\\log \[\\text{H}\^+\]} &=10\^{-4.67} \\\\\\\[\\text{H}\^+\]
&=10\^{-4.67} \\\\\\\[\\text{H}\^+\] &=2.1 \\times
10\^{-5}](ck12_math_images_dir/be17c057a45fc14de0aaaebd5e30d119.png)

The hydrogen ion concentration in this solution is 2.1 × 10 ^-5^ M.

### How to Measure pH {#21.html#x-ck12-SG93IHRvIE1lYXN1cmUgcEg._1-o4f}

There are two common ways to measure pH. When only an approximate pH
value is needed, an inexpensive test involves the use of **acid-base
indicators** , which change color based on the relative acidity of the
solution. One type of common indicator is litmus paper. For example, if
a piece of litmus paper is dipped into an acidic solution (pH below
\~4.5), it will turn red, and dipping it into a basic solution (pH above
\~8.5) will turn it blue. Solutions of intermediate pH will result in
various shades of purple. Because different indicators change color at
different pH values, the use of multiple indicators can generally narrow
down the possible pH of a solution to a range of about 0.5-1 pH units.
**Figure** [below](#21.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjEtMDYtSW5kaWNhdG9ycw..)
shows the colors exhibited by various indicators at different pH values.

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-ZmY5MTlhYmFmZWQwZTNhNTcyZGQyY2NkNGZjZjA2ZTQ.-bnl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng, using data from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PH_indicator" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412727390.png)

**Figure 21.3**

</div>

More precise measurements can be obtained by using a digital pH meter,
which can detect the concentration of H ^+^ based on small changes in
electrical potential. Although a bit more expensive and cumbersome to
use, such a device is essential for determining the exact pH of a
solution.

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-MDYxZDAwNWNiODU5ZGUyMzE5Nzk4MDBmYzhkNzc2YjI.-chx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Datamax/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PH_Meter.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412855160.jpeg)

**Figure 21.4**

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-hja}

-   Water can react with itself to produce H ~3~ O ^+^ and OH ^-^ . The
    equilibrium constant for this reaction (K ~w~ ) is equal to 1.0 × 10
    ^-14^ at 25°C.
-   When talking about acids in an aqueous solution, H ^+^ is often used
    as a shorthand for H ~3~ O ^+^ .
-   pH provides a way to talk about the acidity of a solution (the
    relative concentration of H ^+^ ) using more manageable numbers. It
    is defined by the equation pH = -log \[H ^+^ \].
-   A neutral solution has a pH value of 7 (\[H ^+^ \] = 1.0 × 10
    ^-7^ ). Acidic solutions have lower pH values (higher concentrations
    of H ^+^ ), and basic solutions have higher pH values (lower
    concentrations of H ^+^ ).
-   The pH of a solution can be approximated by using indicators or
    measured more precisely by using a pH meter.

## Lesson Review Questions {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-bbo}

1.  Describe the characteristics of water which make it an
    amphoteric substance.
2.  How do the concentrations of H ~3~ O ^+^ and OH ^-^ compare in pure
    water?
3.  How do the concentrations of H ~3~ O ^+^ and OH ^-^ compare in an
    acid? In a base?
4.  As the concentration of H ~3~ O ^+^ increases, does pH increase or
    decrease? Explain.
5.  As the concentration of OH ^-^ increases, does pH increase or
    decrease? Explain.
6.  What structural feature do Brønsted-Lowry bases and Lewis bases have
    in common?
7.  How can acid-base indicators be used to approximate the pH of a
    solution?
8.  How does litmus paper behave in an acidic solution versus in a basic
    solution?
9.  Calculate the pH of the following solutions. Assume complete
    dissociation of each strong acid (\[Acid\] = \[H ^+^ \]):
    1.  4.5 x 10 ^-3^ M HBr
    2.  1.34 x 10 ^-4^ M HCl
    3.  7.98 x 10 ^-2^ M HNO ~3~

10. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentrations in each of the following
    solutions:
    1.  pH = 1.05
    2.  pH = 5.65
    3.  pH = 2.42

11. If the approximate pH of a solution is known, the indicators that
    will give you the most information are those for which the color
    change occurs near that pH value. Which indicator would you choose
    to check the approximate pH of the following solutions?
    1.  pH \~ 4.1
    2.  pH \~ 7.0
    3.  pH \~ 2.4

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#21.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-kzs}

-   The pH scale:
    [http://www.elmhurst.edu/\~chm/vchembook/184ph.html](184ph.html)
-   How to calculate pH:
    [http://www.csun.edu/\~jeloranta/CHEM102/discussion7.pdf](discussion7.pdf)
-   pH calculator: [http://www.webqc.org/phsolver.php](phsolver.php)

## Points to Consider {#21.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-sbo}

-   How do we classify an acid as strong or weak?
-   For a given concentration of acid, would you expect the pH to be
    lower for a strong acid or a weak acid?
-   How can the relative strengths of various acids be quantified?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686163] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686164] -->

# Acid and Base Strength {#21.html#x-ck12-QWNpZCBhbmQgQmFzZSBTdHJlbmd0aA..}

## Lesson Objectives {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-qvr}

-   Explain the difference between a strong acid and a weak acid.
-   Explain the difference between a strong base and a weak base.
-   Calculate the pH values of acidic or basic solutions based on the
    original concentration of the acid or base.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-3dc}

-   **strong acid** : An acid which when dissolved in water will
    completely transfer its proton to the solvent.
-   **weak acid** : An acid whose dissociation favors the reactants at
    equilibrium; only a small number of the acidic molecules dissociate
    to form H ^+^ .
-   **strong base** : A base whose dissociation favors the products at
    equilibrium; most molecules *do* remove a proton from water.
-   **weak base** : A base whose dissociation favors the reactants at
    equilibrium; most molecules do *not* ' remove a proton from water.

## Check Your Understanding {#21.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-oec}

-   How are equilibrium constants calculated from data about the
    concentrations of each reacting species?

## Strong vs. Weak Acids {#21.html#x-ck12-U3Ryb25nIHZzLiBXZWFrIEFjaWRz_2-aqm}

So far, we have primarily been defining acids by their ability to donate
an H ^+^ ion and bases by their ability to accept an H ^+^ ion. However,
acids and bases vary in their relative ability to undergo these
processes.

In general, acids can be classified as strong or weak based on the
extent to which they produce H ~3~ O ^+^ when dissolved in water. For a
generic acid, we can write the following equilibrium reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-fqm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-yvg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bud">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{HA(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
H\_3O\^+(aq)+A\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/03c0d2b2192035b3a714e8dd466e26ca.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Using the usual shorthand notation, this equation can also be written as
follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-7dm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bei">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-rzx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{HA(aq) \\rightleftarrows
H\^+(aq)+A\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/0a8c9997d8ddf4be322cbb0d160c8817.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This type of equilibrium, in which a proton is being transferred to
water, is often indicated by writing the equilibrium constant as K ~a~ .
The relative position of this equilibrium for a given acid determines
whether it will be considered strong or weak. When dissolved in water, a
**strong acid** will completely transfer its proton to the solvent. In
terms of the equilibrium above, the products will be heavily favored (K
~a~ &gt;&gt; 1). In fact, the products are so heavily favored that the
reverse reaction is often not even considered, and the proton transfer
is written as unidirectional. For example, the strong acid HCl can
dissociate in water according to the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQxZDhjZDk4ZjAwYjIwNGU5ODAwOTk4ZWNmODQyN2U.-7un">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-btp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bny">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{HCl(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\to
H\_3O\^+(aq)+Cl\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/545f896c5bc099cc2fd33899215e5e5c.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQxZDhjZDk4ZjAwYjIwNGU5ODAwOTk4ZWNmODQyN2U.-iuf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQxZDhjZDk4ZjAwYjIwNGU5ODAwOTk4ZWNmODQyN2U.-m1n">
<dd>
( ![\\mathrm{HCl(aq) \\to
H\^+(aq)+Cl\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/2ce650a0cc11e6507eebd7fd8eaea6af.png)
)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
At equilibrium, essentially no intact HCl molecules are still present in
solution.

In contrast, the equilibrium for a **weak acid** favors the reactants. A
particularly common type of weak acid is an organic molecule that
contains a carboxyl group (CO ~2~ H, sometimes written as COOH). For
example, acetic acid (the acidic component of vinegar) has the formula
CH ~3~ CO ~2~ H. Its dissociation equation can be written as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQxZDhjZDk4ZjAwYjIwNGU5ODAwOTk4ZWNmODQyN2U.-g9b">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ycv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-rfi">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{CH\_3CO\_2H(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
H\_3O\^+(aq)+CH\_3CO\_2\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/40e509f06b5b98a8f31638b2bf7c6bf2.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQxZDhjZDk4ZjAwYjIwNGU5ODAwOTk4ZWNmODQyN2U.-k9r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQxZDhjZDk4ZjAwYjIwNGU5ODAwOTk4ZWNmODQyN2U.-ml3">
<dd>
( ![\\mathrm{CH\_3CO\_2H(aq) \\rightleftarrows
H\^+(aq)+CH\_3CO\_2\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/1f69ea1328aff8fad7631be46a1279eb.png)
)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because we are dealing with a weak acid, K ~a~ for this equilibrium is
much less than 1. At equilibrium, most of the acetic acid molecules are
still intact, and only a small percentage have transferred their protons
to the solvent. The K ~a~ values for some weak acids are listed in the
**Table** [below](#21.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6S2E.) .

  Acid Name           Structure     K ~a~
  ------------------- ------------- ----------------
  hydrofluoric acid   H-F           7.1 × 10 ^-4^
  nitrous acid        O=N-O-H       4.5 × 10 ^-4^
  formic acid         HCOOH         1.7 × 10 ^-4^
  acetic acid         CH ~3~ COOH   1.8 × 10 ^-5^
  hydrocyanic acid    H-CN          4.9 × 10 ^-10^

In more advanced textbooks, you can learn how to tell whether a
particular acid is strong or weak. For now, be able to recognize the
following as strong acids: HCl, HBr, HI, HNO ~3~ , H ~2~ SO ~4~ , and
HClO ~4~ . All of these strong acids ionize completely when dissolved in
water. Most other acids that you encounter in general chemistry courses
are weak acids.

## Strong vs. Weak Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-U3Ryb25nIHZzLiBXZWFrIEJhc2Vz_2-lno}

Analogous to the acid dissociation reaction from the previous section,
we can write the reaction between a generic base and water as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-l3g">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-upt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-xig">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{B(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
BH\^+(aq)+OH\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/9836390886ebb96067d3d22e3c95d357.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The equilibrium constant for a reaction in which a base is deprotonating
water (taking water's hydrogen atom) is often given the symbol K ~b~ .
Strong bases and weak bases can then be defined based on the position of
this equilibrium. A **weak base** would have a very small K ~b~ value
(much less than 1), indicating that most molecules of the base do *not*
remove a proton from water. Conversely, a **strong base** would have a K
~b~ value greater than or equal to 1.

Nitrogen-containing compounds are a common type of weak base. The lone
pair on the nitrogen atom can accept a proton from water as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-8vt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-osv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-whc">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{NH\_3(aq)+H\_2O(l) \\rightleftarrows
NH\_4\^+(aq)+OH\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/dc717f3a995bb810ffcb205af927ec29.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The equilibrium constant for this reaction is quite low, so most of the
NH ~3~ molecules will not remove a proton from water. K ~b~ values for a
few nitrogen-containing bases are listed in the **Table**
[below](#21.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6S2I.) .

  Base                                 K ~b~
  ------------------------------------ ---------------
  ethylamine (CH ~3~ CH ~2~ NH ~2~ )   5.6 × 10 ^-4^
  methylamine (CH ~3~ NH ~2~ )         4.4 × 10 ^-4^
  ammonia (NH ~3~ )                    1.8 × 10 ^-5^

The only strong bases that are commonly used in general chemistry
courses are ionic compounds composed of metal cations and hydroxide
anions, such as NaOH, KOH, or Ba(OH) ~2~ .

## Calculating pH for Acidic and Basic Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpbmcgcEggZm9yIEFjaWRpYyBhbmQgQmFzaWMgU29sdXRpb25z_2-n3t}

### Strong Acids and Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-U3Ryb25nIEFjaWRzIGFuZCBCYXNlcw.._2-yve}

In the case of strong acids and bases, the pH for a solution of known
concentration is relatively easy to calculate. For example, the strong
acid HCl will dissociate completely, so we assume that the amount of
acid added to the solution is equal to the amount of H ^+^ present at
equilibrium.

**Example 21.3**

What is the pH of a 0.150 M aqueous solution of HCl?

*Answer:*

Because HCl is a strong acid, we can assume that all of its acidic
hydrogens are transferred to the solvent molecules. Therefore, \[H ^+^
\] = 0.150 M, so pH can be calculated as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-YmQ1MTg5MzljNWFjYTc2ZWU2MjcwZmQzNWMwZjlhZGE.-ynf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzkyYzUwN2M0MDJlMTMzOGZiMjM2ZWFlMWFhZjA5NGI.-rhu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzkyYzUwN2M0MDJlMTMzOGZiMjM2ZWFlMWFhZjA5NGI.-kje">
<dd>
pH = - log \[H ^+^ \]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWQ3ZjAzZjA2MDEwOWMyZmE4MmMwNmYxZThlYmNhNmU.-r4e">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWQ3ZjAzZjA2MDEwOWMyZmE4MmMwNmYxZThlYmNhNmU.-ymd">
<dd>
pH = - log \[0.150\]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQxMWM2Y2E2Yzc5MTMyNDRmNDA4ZDE5ZmE4Zjk2YjY.-zid">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDQxMWM2Y2E2Yzc5MTMyNDRmNDA4ZDE5ZmE4Zjk2YjY.-0yo">
<dd>
pH =0.82

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
As expected for an acidic solution, the pH is much lower than 7.

Because the strong bases that you will encounter are all ionic compounds
that contain the hydroxide anion, you can assume complete dissociation
in water, which would tell you the concentration of hydroxide. Then, the
concentration of H ^+^ can be calculated using the expression for K ~w~
.

**Example 21.4**

What is the pH of a 0.245 M aqueous solution of NaOH?

*Answer:*

Because NaOH is a soluble ionic compound, we can assume that it fully
dissociates in water. After dissociation, \[OH ^-^ \] = 0.245 M. We can
then use the value of K ~w~ to determine \[H ^+^ \].

<dl id="x-ck12-tnc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-z8r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-6i5">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_w=\[H\^+\]\[OH\^-\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/9e4f8f8010394d78a7a05faf4bd2dc4a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lxh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-eki">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{1.0 \\times
10\^{-14}=\[H\^+\]\[0.245\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/b69a9990c40a21af2b0cc243ad7e5ef1.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-m7o">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-n9f">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\[H\^+\]=4.08 \\times
10\^{-14}}](ck12_math_images_dir/cf694f53d5accafe013a59b770d0fa50.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Then, use the definition of pH to determine the pH of this solution:

<dl id="x-ck12-YzI1ZTM3NTExNjc3OWFlMzY3OGQ5NDZjZmJlMjczMjE.-brl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzkyYzUwN2M0MDJlMTMzOGZiMjM2ZWFlMWFhZjA5NGI.-efp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzkyYzUwN2M0MDJlMTMzOGZiMjM2ZWFlMWFhZjA5NGI.-jui">
<dd>
pH = - log \[H ^+^ \]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzQwMWQ1ZjQxZTY4OWU0NzMyYjczYmQ0ZTlmNTZkNGE.-jwm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzQwMWQ1ZjQxZTY4OWU0NzMyYjczYmQ0ZTlmNTZkNGE.-qyf">
<dd>
pH = - log \[4.08 × 10\^{-14}\]

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NmY1ODY1ZWIyOTk3MGYwYzU5MTU4YjIzMTkzODU4MTM.-q1r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NmY1ODY1ZWIyOTk3MGYwYzU5MTU4YjIzMTkzODU4MTM.-n2l">
<dd>
pH =13.39

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
As expected for a basic solution, this value is significantly larger
than 7.

### Weak Acids and Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-V2VhayBBY2lkcyBhbmQgQmFzZXM._2-d7c}

Because only a small portion of any available weak acid or base
molecules undergo a proton transfer to form either H ^+^ or OH ^-^ ions,
calculating the pH of one of these solutions is slightly more
complicated. The following example problem outlines the general strategy
for answering this type of question.

**Example Problem 21.5**

The K ~a~ of acetic acid (CH ~3~ CO ~2~ H) is 1.8 × 10 ^-5^ . Calculate
the pH of a 0.50 M solution of acetic acid.

*Answer:*

First, set up an ICE table for the acid dissociation equation. Before
any proton transfers occur, we have acetic acid at a concentration of
0.50 M, no acetate anion, and an H ^+^ concentration of 1.0 × 10 ^-7^ M.
Once the reaction begins, some of the acetic acid will be converted to
acetate as it transfers an H ^+^ ion to the solvent. The amount of
acetic acid that dissociates in order to reach equilibrium (the quantity
you are trying to find) is represented by *x* . A corresponding increase
then occurs in the concentrations of the products. The equilibrium
concentrations of each species can then be written in terms of *x* .

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
               CH ~3~ CO    ![\\mathrm{\ H ^+^        +            CH ~3~ CO
               ~2~ H        \rightleftar                           ~2~ ^-^
                            rows}](ck12_                           
                            math_images_                           
                            dir/c784d0ab                           
                            8a0120798063                           
                            e33043405c56                           
                            .png)                                  
  ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------
  Initial      0.50                      1.0 × 10                  0.00
  concentratio                           ^-7^                      
  n                                                                
  (M)                                                              

  Change (M)   -x                        +x                        +x

  At           0.50 – x                  1.0 × 10                  x
  equilibrium                            ^-7^ + x                  
  (M)                                                              
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then, write the equilibrium constant expression and plug in the
equilibrium values from the ICE table.

<dl id="x-ck12-6g2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-sax">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zkw">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_a=\\frac{\[H\^+\]\[CH\_3CO\_2\^-\]}{\[CH\_3CO\_2H\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/3810f32fc26f69d27310b0b3b25d04b7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ion">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-3x9">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{1.8 \\times 10\^{-5}=\\frac{\[1.0 \\times
10\^{-7}+x\]\[x\]}{\[0.50-x\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/b03c32858d2ebb1e08020c0092b610ea.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Solving this equation by hand would be quite difficult. Fortunately, for
essentially all of the weak acid problems that you will be expected to
solve, we can make two simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that
only a very small percentage of the acetic acid molecules will be
ionized, which means that the drop in concentration (x) is much smaller
than the original concentration (0.50 M). This is reasonable based on
the small value of K ~a~ . Mathematically, this assumption means that
(0.50 - x) is approximately equal to 0.50. For example, say we found
that x had a value of 0.0012. If we subtract this value from 0.50, we
get 0.4988, and rounding to the correct number of significant figures
would give us 0.50. Based on this assumption, we can simplify the above
equation as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-3lg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-tdk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jiw">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{1.8 \\times 10\^{-5}=\\frac{\[1.0 \\times
10\^{-7}+x\]\[x\]}{\[0.50\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/bd01449f058a7ea14335fe8a171e72f0.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The second assumption is that the amount of H ^+^ produced by this
reaction is much larger than the amount already present. This is
reasonable because even a weak acid tends to be much more acidic than
pure water (unless it is present in extremely low concentrations).
Mathematically, this means that we can ignore the 1.0 × 10 ^-7^ M H ^+^
already present. For example, if x has a value of 0.0012, the quantity
(1.0 × 10 ^-7^ + x) is equal to x after rounding to the correct number
of significant figures. This second assumption further simplifies the
equation above, and we can now solve for x:

<dl id="x-ck12-0ec">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bd4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-md5">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{1.8 \\times
10\^{-5}=\\frac{\[x\]\[x\]}{\[0.50\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/a1464f2988c9a5d2c4dfc9a98b65df31.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lbu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-5ym">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{9.0 \\times
10\^{-6}=x\^2}](ck12_math_images_dir/84aecf3fc8b3f57a7a31daae447c7eef.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-peh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-7xu">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{x=0.0030}](ck12_math_images_dir/f6fdeaea91c90f953cdf508bd551557b.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The concentration of H ^+^ at equilibrium is equal to 1.0 × 10 ^-7^ +
0.0030 M, which after rounding is simply 0.0030 M. Then, find the pH as
usual:

<dl id="x-ck12-rge">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gzx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hpn">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH = - log
\[H\^+\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/e1329aa97832ac7a8155e3ed29a385a4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-m7m">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gul">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH = - log
\[0.0030\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/dcc9f8f790d24851c000463fe5276086.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ltd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-0eq">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH
=2.52}](ck12_math_images_dir/6ad13e5aa6e3de462119a02e3d25a1ae.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
A 0.50 M solution of acetic acid would have a pH of 2.52.

As long as we can make the two simplifying assumptions shown above,
determining the pH of a weak acid solution becomes much simpler. As we
saw in the example problem,

<dl id="x-ck12-jps">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-wxn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ml5">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_a=\\frac{\[x\]\^2}{\[C\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/06d885085e56ea12d464a1913ac645a1.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where x is the equilibrium concentration of H ^+^ and C is the original
concentration of the weak acid. Overall, this reduces to a much simpler
expression for finding \[H ^+^ \]:

<dl id="x-ck12-hsq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-i4s">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-u8f">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\[H\^+\]=\\sqrt{C \\times
K\_a}}](ck12_math_images_dir/da46651445aa9bafe6edae4b5f769e82.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Calculations involving weak bases can be carried out in the same
fashion.

## Lesson Summary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-7tv}

-   Strong acids completely transfer their acidic protons to the solvent
    when dissolved in water. When a weak acid is dissolved in water,
    most of the molecules will retain their acidic protons, and only a
    small percentage will dissociate.
-   Strong bases completely dissociate in water, releasing all hydroxide
    anions into the solution. The most common strong bases are soluble
    metal hydroxides. Weak bases partially deprotonate water to form
    small amounts of hydroxide and the protonated base.
-   The pH of an acidic solution can be calculated from the original
    concentration of the acid and the value of K ~a~ . Only the original
    concentration is required for strong acids.
-   The pH of a basic solution can be calculated from the original
    concentration of the base and the value of K ~b~ . Only the original
    concentration is required for strong bases.

## Lesson Review Questions {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-tjw}

1.  Describe the difference between a strong and a weak acid. How does
    the K ~a~ value for a given acid correspond to acid strength?
2.  Describe the difference between a weak acid and a weak base. How
    does the K ~b~ value for a given base correspond to base strength?
3.  Identify each of the following compounds as a strong acid, strong
    base, weak acid, or weak base:
    1.  HCl
    2.  KOH
    3.  HF
    4.  (CH ~3~ ) ~2~ NH
    5.  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ COOH

4.  Calculate the pH of a 0.65 M solution of HF (K ~a~ = 7.1 x 10
    ^-4^ ).
5.  Calculate the pH of a 0.25 M solution of acetic acid (K ~a~ = 1.8 x
    10 ^-5^ ).
6.  A 0.10 M solution of a weak acid gave a pH reading of 4.2. Calculate
    the hydrogen ion concentration, then determine K ~a~ for the
    unknown acid.
7.  Give a few examples of strong and weak acids, and a few examples of
    strong and weak bases.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#21.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-bim}

-   Strong and weak acids and bases:
    [http://www.chemteam.info/AcidBase/Strong-Weak-AcidBase.html](Strong-Weak-AcidBase.html)
-   Calculating K ~a~ values:
    [http://www.chemteam.info/AcidBase/Calc-Ka-from-data.html](Calc-Ka-from-data.html)

## Points to Consider {#21.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-ndb}

What would happen if you combined a strong acid and a strong base?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686164] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686165] -->

# Acid-Base Neutralization Reactions and Titrations {#21.html#x-ck12-QWNpZC1CYXNlIE5ldXRyYWxpemF0aW9uIFJlYWN0aW9ucyBhbmQgVGl0cmF0aW9ucw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._3-vaf}

-   Define and give examples of acid-base neutralization reactions. Be
    able to write both molecular and net ionic equations for
    these reactions.
-   Describe how antacids deal with stomach acidity.
-   Describe the titration process when using an indicator.
-   Describe the titration process when using a pH meter.
-   Describe titration curves for both monoprotic and polyprotic acids.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._3-uum}

-   **neutralization** : The reaction between an acid and a base in
    which neutral water is produced.
-   **titration** : A laboratory technique that very accurately measures
    the concentration of a solution of an acid or a base.
-   **titrant** : The solution of unknown concentration used in
    a titration.
-   **equivalence point** : The point at which the moles of acid that
    were initially present in the flask are equal to the moles of base
    that were added via the buret.
-   **titration curve** : A plot of pH vs. the amount of titrant added.

## Check Your Understanding {#21.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_3-knc}

-   What information can we obtain from an acid equilibrium constant?

## Introduction {#21.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_3-0ue}

If you have ever been stung by a bee, you've likely experienced the
painful burning sensation left by the stinger. This burning or stinging
is caused by an acid in the bee's stinger. One way to relieve this
discomfort is to apply a paste made of baking soda to the sting. Baking
soda contains a weak base called sodium hydrogen carbonate which reacts
with the acid and helps relieve the sting. In this lesson you will learn
about various acid-base reactions and how they work.

## Neutralization of Acids and Bases {#21.html#x-ck12-TmV1dHJhbGl6YXRpb24gb2YgQWNpZHMgYW5kIEJhc2Vz_3-mre}

### The Neutralization Reaction {#21.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE5ldXRyYWxpemF0aW9uIFJlYWN0aW9u_3-ik1}

So far, we have been looking at the interaction between acids and water
(in which water acts as a very weak base) or bases and water (in which
water acts as a very weak acid). However, acids and bases can react
directly with each other as well. A typical acid-base reaction would
have the following form:

<dl id="x-ck12-OTA3YzUxMDdlZTY3NDYyZWVjZTQzNGRhNjUzZjEwYTA.-my5">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTA3YzUxMDdlZTY3NDYyZWVjZTQzNGRhNjUzZjEwYTA.-gbt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTA3YzUxMDdlZTY3NDYyZWVjZTQzNGRhNjUzZjEwYTA.-9mv">
<dd>
acid + base → salt + water

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where the term salt can refer to essentially any ionic compound. An
example would be the reaction between hydrochloric acid and potassium
hydroxide:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZTZmM2M1N2U5Y2NlMzg4MTAyN2QzYzkzNzdkNzgxNTc.-pdl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTZmM2M1N2U5Y2NlMzg4MTAyN2QzYzkzNzdkNzgxNTc.-vgc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTZmM2M1N2U5Y2NlMzg4MTAyN2QzYzkzNzdkNzgxNTc.-zx1">
<dd>
HCl(aq) + KOH(aq) → KCl(aq) + H ~2~ O(l)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Recall from the chapter *Chemical Reactions* that there are several
different ways to write reactions between ionic substances that take
place in water. The equation above is the molecular equation for this
reaction. We can also write the ionic equation as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-MmYxNDMyZjY0OWNkZTMyZmNkYTNmODFiOGZmNTUzZWQ.-70x">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MmYxNDMyZjY0OWNkZTMyZmNkYTNmODFiOGZmNTUzZWQ.-wo7">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MmYxNDMyZjY0OWNkZTMyZmNkYTNmODFiOGZmNTUzZWQ.-yyg">
<dd>
H ^+^ (aq) + Cl ^-^ (aq) + K ^+^ (aq) + OH ^-^ (aq) → K ^+^ (aq) + Cl
^-^ (aq) + H ~2~ O(l)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Removing the spectator ions, which do not change over the course of the
reaction, we get the following net ionic equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-NDk0Mjg1YWI1Zjk0ZjY2ZTY5OTE2ZDY5MTM4NDgwZjY.-3er">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDk0Mjg1YWI1Zjk0ZjY2ZTY5OTE2ZDY5MTM4NDgwZjY.-ir2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDk0Mjg1YWI1Zjk0ZjY2ZTY5OTE2ZDY5MTM4NDgwZjY.-k8x">
<dd>
H ^+^ (aq) + OH ^-^ (aq) → H ~2~ O(l)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The reaction between an acid and a base is referred to as a
**neutralization** reaction, since the more reactive H ^+^ and OH ^-^
ions combine to produce neutral water. When equal amounts of a strong
acid and a strong base are combined, we are left with a neutral solution
(pH = 7).

### How Antacids Work {#21.html#x-ck12-SG93IEFudGFjaWRzIFdvcms._3-jwc}

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-YzFjZTFjZjg2YjgwNGU1ZmE1MGU0ZTJmYTY1YWRiMWI.-lrw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Midnightcomm/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antacid-L478.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.5" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235412971975.jpeg)

**Figure 21.5**

Many antacid tablets use calcium carbonate as an active ingredient.

</div>

Have you ever experienced heartburn? Heartburn is actually a condition
caused by stomach acid, rather something in your heart. The stomach
produces HCl, which is a necessary component of digestion. However,
excessive amounts of stomach acid can cause a great deal of discomfort.
Various factors can cause the overproduction of acid, mostly related to
the types (and amounts) of food and beverages that are being consumed.
Caffeine and other oils in coffee (even decaf) will increase HCl
production in the stomach. Smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol also
increase the formation of stomach acid.

To relieve the discomfort associated with excess stomach acid, many
people turn to antacids. Antacids are essentially just bases that react
with some of the unwanted HCl via a neutralization reaction. Strong
bases like NaOH are far too harsh to ingest, but some less soluble
hydroxide bases can be consumed as suspensions. For example, milk of
magnesia is a suspension of Mg(OH) ~2~ . Al(OH) ~3~ is also available as
a safe formulation. Both of these compounds will remain largely
undissolved until they reach the stomach, where they will react with the
excess acid without subjecting other parts of the body to strongly basic
conditions. However, these can lead to other types of issues with
continued use, such as constipation, kidney damage, and possibly even
bone depletion.

These days, the most common antacids use weak bases, such as carbonate
or bicarbonate ions, to neutralize the HCl. The resulting carbonic acid
can then decompose into water and carbon dioxide. For example, drinking
a solution of sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) will result in the
following reactions:

<dl id="x-ck12-YjdkMDFkOTZlMmI5ZWI0MDQxNzVlMmFmZTE2MDhmNWQ.-mz9">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWM0ODUyZGUzYzAyZTU3N2E3YjE3NGM0Y2NkODNkYzM.-lv8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWM0ODUyZGUzYzAyZTU3N2E3YjE3NGM0Y2NkODNkYzM.-qgr">
<dd>
HCl(aq) + NaHCO ~3~ (aq) → NaCl(aq) + H ~2~ CO ~3~ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWU1MTI5MmFhNWIzMTNlMDc4YmIyZDBmODIyOWYzOTI.-thn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWU1MTI5MmFhNWIzMTNlMDc4YmIyZDBmODIyOWYzOTI.-i7x">
<dd>
H ~2~ CO ~3~ (aq) → H ~2~ O(l) + CO ~2~ (g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
It should be noted that a newer class of antacids does not work by
directly neutralizing stomach acid. Instead, they act to inhibit the
proton pumps that generate the acid in the first place. Proton pump
inhibitors decrease the activity of these pumps and lower the amount of
acid produced by the stomach, but they do not neutralize the acid
already present.

## Acid-Base Titrations {#21.html#x-ck12-QWNpZC1CYXNlIFRpdHJhdGlvbnM._3-xcr}

A **titration** is a laboratory technique that very accurately measures
the concentration of a solution of acid or base. It makes use of a
neutralization reaction and the fact that pH changes very rapidly for
neutral (and nearly neutral) solutions.

The following is a typical procedure for titration of a strong acid with
a strong base: Let's say you have a solution of HCl, but the
concentration is not known. First, a known volume of the acid is placed
in a flask, and a few drops of an acid-base indicator, such as
phenolphthalein, are added. Because this solution is acidic, and
phenolphthalein is colorless at low pH values, the solution remains
clear.

Next, a solution of a strong base, such as NaOH is placed into a piece
of glassware called a buret ( **Figure**
[below](#21.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjEtMTEtQnVyZXQ.) ). This solution,
which has a known concentration, is referred to as the **titrant** .
Then, the titrant is added drop by drop to the acid while swirling the
flask. Because phenolphthalein turns pink when exposed to base, the
drops of the titrant may initially appear pink when they hit the acid,
but after swirling, the base is neutralized by the HCl, and the pink
color fades. Once the pink color no longer fades after swirling, the
solution in the flask is basic (pH &gt; 7), which means all of the HCl
has been neutralized by the NaOH titrant. The volume of the titrant that
was added to the acid can be measured by looking at the initial and
final levels of the solution in the buret.

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-NTRkNzVjZGRkNTdiYjk5YmI3ZjI1NmU5N2Y0NjRiMDM.-jse"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright i4lcocl2, 2014" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235413093567.jpeg)

**Figure 21.6**

</div>

At this point, called the **equivalence point** , the moles of acid that
were initially present in the flask are equal to the number of moles of
base that were added via the buret. Remember that to calculate the
number of moles of solute, we multiply the concentration of the solution
(in mol/L) by the volume of the solution (in L). At the equivalence
point:

<dl id="x-ck12-rp0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ktu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-0bw">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{moles \\ acid = moles \\
base}](ck12_math_images_dir/da638e1b2781445fa288efdeb83c4ebe.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2sr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-t8h">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{M\_{acid} \\times V\_{acid}=M\_{base} \\times
V\_{base}}](ck12_math_images_dir/5204eee16d25d2a138ef5ad043bf3abe.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where M and V are the concentration and volume, respectively, of the two
solutions. After performing the titration above, we know the volume of
the initial acid in the flask, the concentration of the base, and the
volume of the titrant that was required to reach the equivalence point.
We can therefore solve for the concentration of the HCl solution.

**Example 21.6**

A 25.0 mL sample of an HCl solution is titrated with 0.050 M NaOH. The
equivalence point is reached after the addition of 46.7 mL of the NaOH
solution. What is the concentration of the HCl solution?

*Answer:*

Simply plug these values into the equation above:

<dl id="x-ck12-kmr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zmb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jfo">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{M\_{acid} \\times V\_{acid}=M\_{base} \\times
V\_{base}}](ck12_math_images_dir/5204eee16d25d2a138ef5ad043bf3abe.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-y6r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-g59">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{M\_{acid} \\times 25.0 \\ mL=0.050 \\ M \\times 46.7 \\
mL}](ck12_math_images_dir/2baa5eff9e735fe96b6e05ba17de1260.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-mze">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-djg">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{M\_{acid}=0.093 \\
M}](ck12_math_images_dir/988d3239b35ca731ce433f74e327ebbd.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
### Titration Curves {#21.html#x-ck12-VGl0cmF0aW9uIEN1cnZlcw.._3-aiy}

If the pH of a solution is tracked with a pH meter over the course of
the titration, we can get even more useful information about what is
occurring in solution. A **titration curve** is a plot of pH vs. the
amount of titrant added. The shape and position of the curve can be used
not just to determine the equivalence point, but also to determine
whether the acid is strong or weak and the K ~a~ value (for weak acids).

**Figure**
[below](#21.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjEtMTItU3Ryb25nLVRpcmF0aW9uLUN1cnZl)
shows two titration curves. The curve on the left represents the
experiment we just described, in which a strong base (NaOH) is added to
a strong acid (HCl). The volume of base added is plotted on the x-axis,
and the pH obtained is plotted on the y-axis. We see a very sharp rise
in pH as the equivalence point is reached. The dotted line shows us the
volume of base that must be added to get to this point.

The graph on the right shows a titration of a strong base with a strong
acid. Although the pH is decreasing rather than increasing, the
principle is the same. At the equivalence point, the moles of added acid
are equal to the moles of base that were initially present, so the same
equation can be used to determine the unknown concentration.

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-YTFjOWE1ZGUzMWZkZTFmMzI0YTRkZDFhNjEwMTgwM2Q.-x9g"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235413281361.png)

**Figure 21.7**

</div>

This approach can also be used to titrate a weak acid. In **Figure**
[below](#21.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjEtMTMtV2Vhay1UaXRyYXRpb24tQ3VydmU.) ,
we see a comparison between the titration curves obtained for HCl and
for acetic acid (a weak acid). There are a couple of noteworthy
differences. First, the curve for the weak acid has a small plateau
about halfway to the equivalence point. We will not go into the details,
but as it turns out, the pH at the flattest point of this plateau can be
used to determine the K ~a~ of the acid according to the following
equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZmMwZmI0YmE5ZjM3MWMzOTcxZWFiMzFlNmQ3MjQ1MzI.-yud">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmMwZmI0YmE5ZjM3MWMzOTcxZWFiMzFlNmQ3MjQ1MzI.-dfe">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZmMwZmI0YmE5ZjM3MWMzOTcxZWFiMzFlNmQ3MjQ1MzI.-afm">
<dd>
pH = - log(K ~a~ )

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Additionally, the pH at the equivalence point is higher than 7 when
titrating a weak acid. This is because the anion from the weak acid
(acetate) is slightly basic, whereas the anion from the strong acid
(chloride) is an extremely poor base.

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-zah"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235413394693.jpeg)

**Figure 21.8**

</div>

Polyprotic acids have distinctive titration curves. These acids have
multiple dissociation constants, one for each acidic proton. For
example, phosphoric acid has three acidic hydrogens:

H ~3~ PO ~4~
![\\mathrm{\\overset{K\_{a\_1}}{\\rightleftarrows}}](ck12_math_images_dir/848a6ec4a23fba488f7eb48979600f7c.png)
H ^+^ + H ~2~ PO ~4~ ^-^
![\\mathrm{\\overset{K\_{a\_2}}{\\rightleftarrows}}](ck12_math_images_dir/40e4b57b2883187971437fbeb2a169bb.png)
H ^+^ + HPO ~4~ ^2-^
![\\mathrm{\\overset{K\_{a\_3}}{\\rightleftarrows}}](ck12_math_images_dir/c02fbbb80d7913921f357e0c83b8281f.png)
H ^+^ + PO ~4~ ^3-^

![\\mathrm{K\_{a\_1} = 7.5 x 10\^{-3} \\ \\ K\_{a\_2} = 6.2 x 10 \^{-8}
\\ \\ K\_{a\_3} = 4.8 x
10\^{-13}}](ck12_math_images_dir/51865ce246e3deccd89789fa0c531a5c.png)

On the titration curve for phosphoric acid, we can see three vertical
inflection points corresponding to the equivalence points for each
acidic proton. (The third one is not very clear, because HPO ~4~ ^2-^ is
not much more acidic than water.) As in the case of a monoprotic weak
acid, the plateaus in the curve above can be used to determine the K ~a~
values for each acidic hydrogen in phosphoric acid.

<div
id="21.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-vke"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_21_files/20151009235413508346.jpeg)

**Figure 21.9**

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._3-agk}

-   Combining an acid and a base results in a neutralization reaction.
    For strong acids and bases, the net ionic equation is simply H ^+^ +
    OH ^-^ → H ~2~ O.
-   Weak bases or poorly soluble strong bases can be ingested to
    neutralize excess stomach acid.
-   The concentration of an acid or base can be determined by titration.
-   A pH meter allows the construction of a titration curve. The data
    from a titration curve can be used to determine the equivalence
    point, the type of acid or base (strong vs. weak), and the K ~a~ or
    K ~b~ value of the acid or base being titrated.

## Lesson Review Questions {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._3-mwu}

1.  What are the products of a typical acid-base reaction?
2.  Why are acid-base reactions referred to as neutralization reactions?
3.  How do antacids relieve heartburn?
4.  Read the ingredients on a container of antacids. Write equations for
    the neutralization of HCl based on those ingredients.
5.  What property of near-neutral solutions do titration procedures rely
    on?
6.  Define "titrant" and "indicator" as they pertain to
    titration procedures.
7.  Estimate the pH at the equivalence point for the following acid-base
    titrations (i.e. =7, &gt;7, &lt;7):
    1.  strong acid-strong base
    2.  weak acid-strong base
    3.  strong acid-weak base

8.  30\. mL of a HBr solution is titrated with 0.075 M KOH. If 39.1 mL of KOH
    is required to reach the equivalence point, what is the concentration of
    the acid?
9.  45.0 mL of a NaOH solution is titrated with 0.12 M HCl. If 29.6 mL
    is required for neutralization, what is the concentration of the
    NaOH solution?
10. You have two weak acids in unlabeled bottles (a very bad practice,
    by the way). Explain how you could determine which one was acetic
    acid and which one was phosphoric acid.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#21.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._3-5o1}

-   Acid and base titrations:
    [http://www.sparknotes.com/chemistry/acidsbases/titrations/section1.html](section1.html)
-   Neutralization of acids and bases:
    [http://www.iun.edu/\~cpanhd/C101webnotes/chemical%20reactions/acidbase.html](acidbase.html)
-   Titration video:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g8jdCWC10vQ](watch?v=g8jdCWC10vQ)

## Points to Consider {#21.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_3-aln}

-   Many biochemical processes require strict pH control. How can we
    take advantage of the properties of weak acids and bases to
    stabilize a solution at a specific pH?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686165] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686166] -->

# Salt Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-U2FsdCBTb2x1dGlvbnM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._4-thc}

-   Describe salt solutions as acidic, basic, or neutral.
-   Calculate the pH of a salt solution when given relevant data.
-   Explain how buffers work to maintain pH.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._4-uvo}

-   **conjugate base** : The deprotonated form (A ^-^ ) from a given
    acid acid (HA).
-   **conjugate acid** : The resulting molecule after the base accepts
    a proton.
-   **buffer** : Solutions which resist small changes in pH when an acid
    or a base is added to the system.
-   **pK ~a~** : The negative logarithm of the K ~a~ ; a lower pK ~a~
    indicates a more acidic compound.

## Check Your Understanding {#21.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_4-8fc}

-   How do you calculate the concentrations of various reaction
    components at equilibrium?

## Introduction {#21.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_4-clb}

Neutralization reactions between an acid and a base yield a salt and
water. In some cases, this results in a completely neutral solution.
However, some salts are weakly acidic or basic. How can we tell whether
a given salt will act as an acid or base? Looking at the relative
strengths of the acid and base that were used to form the salt can give
us information on the acid-base properties of the resulting solution.

## Salts and Their Interactions with Water {#21.html#x-ck12-U2FsdHMgYW5kIFRoZWlyIEludGVyYWN0aW9ucyB3aXRoIFdhdGVy_4-fmd}

### Salts Forming Neutral Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-U2FsdHMgRm9ybWluZyBOZXV0cmFsIFNvbHV0aW9ucw.._4-r0b}

The simplest situation is a salt formed by combining a strong acid and a
strong base. These salts are neither acidic nor basic, so they do not
affect the pH of the solution when dissolved in water. For example, the
ionic compound NaNO ~3~ could be prepared by combining the strong acid
HNO ~3~ and the strong base NaOH. If we were to dissolve NaNO ~3~ in
water, it would dissociate into Na ^+^ and NO ~3~ ^-^ ions. Neither ion
is a strong enough acid or base to cause any noticeable proton
transfers, so the pH of the pure water is not altered.

### Salts Forming Basic Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-U2FsdHMgRm9ybWluZyBCYXNpYyBTb2x1dGlvbnM._4-coz}

A salt formed from a weak acid and a strong base will form a solution
that has a pH greater than 7. For example, sodium acetate could be
formed by neutralizing acetic acid with sodium hydroxide. Dissolving
sodium acetate in water will produce sodium ions and acetate ions. The
Na ^+^ ion is not a strong enough acid or base to donate or accept any
protons, but the acetate ion is a weak base:

CH ~3~ COO ^-^ + H ~2~ O
![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
CH ~3~ COOH + OH ^-^

Although this equilibrium favors the reactants (acetate is still a weak
base), there will still be some additional hydroxide produced, skewing
the H ^+^ / OH ^-^ balance and increasing the pH of the solution. The
equilibrium constant for this reaction can be written as follows:

![\\mathrm{K\_b = \\frac{\[CH\_3COOH\]\[OH\^-\]}{\[CH\_3COO\^-\]} = 5.6
\\times
10\^{-10}}](ck12_math_images_dir/b2a9056ef84c99006c09c0d5c0d75fdb.png)

### Salts Forming Acidic Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-U2FsdHMgRm9ybWluZyBBY2lkaWMgU29sdXRpb25z_4-cul}

A salt formed from a strong acid and a weak base will give an acidic
solution when dissolved in water. For example, NH ~4~ Cl, which is
formed by neutralizing the weak base ammonia with HCl, would dissociate
into the following ions:

NH ~4~ Cl
![\\mathrm{\\overset{H\_2O}{\\rightarrow}}](ck12_math_images_dir/90b52f9b5d33b389b70561fac0aa0bf9.png)
NH ~4~ ^+^ + Cl ^-^

The ammonium ion then acts as a weak acid, while the chloride ion is not
a strong enough base to affect the pH of the solution.

NH ~4~ ^+^
![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
NH ~3~ + H ^+^

Calculations involving acidic and basic salts are carried out in the
same way as other acid-base equilibrium calculations. Depending upon the
data available, we can calculate equilibrium constants or the pH of a
solution with a known concentration.

## Buffer Solutions {#21.html#x-ck12-QnVmZmVyIFNvbHV0aW9ucw.._4-ozf}

Consider the generic equilibrium for the dissociation of an acid:

HA
![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
H ^+^ + A ^-^

In the reverse direction, the anion A ^-^ is acting as a base by
accepting a proton. For a given acid (HA), its deprotonated form (A ^-^
) is referred to as its **conjugate base** . The conjugate base of a
strong acid is an extremely poor base, which is why the reverse reaction
essentially does not proceed. For example, HCl dissociates completely in
water, and the chloride ion (its conjugate base) is not really thought
of as a base. In contrast, the conjugate base of a weak acid is a weak
base. For example, the acetate ion, which is the conjugate base of
acetic acid, is slightly basic.

A similar terminology is used when dissolving bases in water. After the
base accepts a proton, the resulting molecule or ion is referred to as
its **conjugate acid** . For example, the ammonium ion (NH ~4~ ^+^ ) is
the conjugate acid of ammonia (NH ~3~ ).

We can take advantage of the properties of conjugate acids and bases to
make **buffer** solutions, which resist small changes in pH when an acid
or a base is added to the system. Biological buffers play important
roles in maintaining a constant pH in cells and tissues, which is
required in order for many biochemical reactions to proceed efficiently.

Buffers can be generated in the laboratory by making a mixture of both a
weak acid and its conjugate base. Consider the following equilibrium
between acetic acid and the acetate ion:

CH ~3~ COOH
![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
H ^+^ + CH ~3~ COO ^-^

If we dissolved both acetic acid and some source of acetate anion (such
as sodium acetate) in water, the resulting solution would be set up to
absorb small amounts of added acid or base without major changes to the
concentration of H ^+^ . For example, if a strong acid was added, most
of the resulting H ^+^ ions would combine with acetate ions to make
molecules of acetic acid. The addition of a strong base would cause
mostly deprotonation of the acetic acid, and very little increase in the
concentration of the hydroxide ion.

If we know the concentration of both the acid and its conjugate base, we
can calculate the pH of the buffer based on the ratio between these two
components. For example, say we made a solution that contained 0.10 M
acetic acid and 0.20 M sodium acetate. The equilibrium expression for
this reaction has the following form:

<dl id="x-ck12-6zn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-vwo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-su9">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_a=\\frac{\[CH\_3COO\^-\]\[H\^+\]}{\[CH\_3COOH\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/e95948f42b38375833963580010710c8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Plugging in the known concentrations, along with the K ~a~ of acetic
acid (1.74 × 10 ^-5^ ) allows us to solve for the concentration of H ^+^
:

<dl id="x-ck12-hw6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ele">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-n7i">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{1.74 \\times
10\^{-5}=\\frac{\[0.20\]\[H\^+\]}{\[0.10\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/64bb9de876cb6c2d5646ba7f2fef349f.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uhf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-s6v">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\[H\^+\]=\\frac{\[0.10\]}{\[0.20\]}(1.74 \\times
10\^{-5})}](ck12_math_images_dir/615ee9ee94e9ba1c4a94c79b92cd20e8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-sy4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ing">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{\[H\^+\]=8.70 \\times 10\^{-6} \\
M}](ck12_math_images_dir/d85d28e3afa271ce4a85a41358c21eb7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Then, we can calculate the pH as usual:

<dl id="x-ck12-k5m">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uym">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-nof">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH = - log
\[H\^+\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/e1329aa97832ac7a8155e3ed29a385a4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-vzg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-plz">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH = - log \[8.70 \\times
10\^{-6}\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/e3d6cd3952ba2694a4446747d7b33e54.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lby">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-p37">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH
=5.06}](ck12_math_images_dir/a856ffe9867f962958806fc9b0a5971d.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This buffer would have a pH of 5.06. We can tailor the buffer to a
specific pH by changing the ratio of acid to salt in the mixture.

Note that if we have equal concentrations of the acid and its conjugate
base, the equilibrium constant expression can be simplified as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-nnt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-czr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-pfq">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_a=\\frac{\[CH\_3COO\^-\]\[H\^+\]}{\[CH\_3COOH\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/e95948f42b38375833963580010710c8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jxy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ms8">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_a=\\frac{\[x\]\[H\^+\]}{\[x\]}}](ck12_math_images_dir/6f74ed47272902980a2857ce006fa0e8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-j6e">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-3r0">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\_a=\[H\^+\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/9625918b155bb19fd658c6fff7caf1aa.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This also means that the pH can be determined directly from the K ~a~ :

<dl id="x-ck12-pmz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jn7">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-oz3">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH = - log
\[H\^+\]}](ck12_math_images_dir/e1329aa97832ac7a8155e3ed29a385a4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hpn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-mrk">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{pH = - log
(K\_a)}](ck12_math_images_dir/372c99d3e4b4cf8e92457293d5d30eaf.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The negative logarithm of the K ~a~ is known as the **pK ~a~** of an
acid. Tables of acid strengths often list pK ~a~ values instead of K ~a~
values so that exponents are not required. As with pH, a lower pK ~a~
indicates a more acidic compound.

## Lesson Summary {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._4-nw8}

-   A salt formed from a weak acid and a strong base will form a basic
    solution (pH &gt; 7), because the anion acts as a weak base.
-   A salt formed from a strong acid and a weak base will form an acidic
    solution (pH &lt; 7), because the cation acts as a weak acid.
-   A salt formed from a strong acid and a strong base will form a
    neutral solution (pH = 7), because neither the cation nor the anion
    is a sufficiently strong acid or base.
-   The deprotonated form of an acid is referred to as its
    conjugate base. Similarly, the protonated form of a base is referred
    to as its conjugate acid.
-   A mixture of a weak acid and its conjugate base (or a weak base and
    its conjugate acid) produces a buffer, which is resistant to large
    changes in pH even when additional acid or base is added.

## Lesson Review Questions {#21.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._4-iue}

1.  What types of acids and bases form neutral salt solutions?
2.  What types of acids and bases from basic salt solutions?
3.  What types of acids and bases form acidic salt solutions?
4.  Define conjugate acid and conjugate base in the general acid
    dissociation equation, HA
    ![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
    H ^+^ + A ^-^ .
5.  Write the formula and charge for the conjugate base of each of the
    following weak acids:
    1.  HNO ~2~
    2.  HCOOH
    3.  C ~6~ H ~5~ COOH
    4.  C ~6~ H ~5~ OH

6.  Write the formula and charge for the conjugate acid of each of the
    following weak bases:
    1.  CH ~3~ NH ~2~
    2.  C ~5~ H ~5~ N
    3.  C ~6~ H ~5~ NH ~2~

7.  When NaF is dissolved in water, the following reaction occurs: F
    ^-^ + H ~2~ O
    ![\\mathrm{\\rightleftarrows}](ck12_math_images_dir/c784d0ab8a0120798063e33043405c56.png)
    HF + OH ^-^ . The K ~b~ for this process is 1.4 × 10 ^-11^ . If a
    0.1 M solution of NaF is prepared, what is the equilibrium
    concentration of HF?
8.  What initial concentration of KCN is needed to provide an
    equilibrium HCN concentration of 0.0025 M? The K ~b~ for CN ^-^ is
    2.0 × 10 ^-5^ .
9.  Explain why buffer solutions are able to resist small changes in pH.
10. What ratio of benzoic acid to sodium benzoate should be used to
    prepare a buffer solution with a pH of 4.3? The K ~a~ for benzoic
    acid is 6.5 × 10 ^-5^ .
11. What is the pH of a solution containing equal concentrations of
    formic acid and potassium formate? The K ~a~ for formic acid is 1.7
    × 10 ^-4^ .

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#21.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._4-892}

-   Acidic, basic, and neutral salts:
    [http://www.science.uwaterloo.ca/\~cchieh/cact/c123/salts.html](salts.html)
-   Buffer solutions:
    [http://chemed.chem.wisc.edu/chempaths/GenChem-Textbook/Buffer-Solutions-620.html](Buffer-Solutions-620.html)
-   Buffer systems in the blood:
    [http://www.chemistry.wustl.edu/\~edudev/LabTutorials/Buffer/Buffer.html](Buffer.html)

## Points to Consider {#21.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_4-0f3}

The pH of a system is very important for sustaining life. Biochemical
processes require careful pH control in order to maintain cellular
integrity.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686166] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#21.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-x45}

1.  Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
2.  Hana Zavadska and Zachary Wilson. [CK-12
    Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
3.  Joy Sheng, using data
    from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PH\_indicator. [CK-12
    Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
4.  User:Datamax/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PH\_Meter.jpg](File:PH_Meter.jpg) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Midnightcomm/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antacid-L478.jpg](File:Antacid-L478.jpg) .
    CC BY 2.5
6.  Image copyright i4lcocl2, 2014.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
7.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
8.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
9.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="22.html"></span>

# Oxidation Reduction Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-T3hpZGF0aW9uIFJlZHVjdGlvbiBSZWFjdGlvbnM.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_22_files/20151009235419816588.jpeg)
</span>

Have you ever seen someone breathe into a device like this? This person
is breathing into a breathalyzer, a device used to detect the presence
of ethanol (an alcohol) in a person’s breath. One version of the
breathalyzer works by measuring the color change of a solution of the
dichromate ion. In the presence of ethanol, the solution changes from
orange to green as the dichromate ion is converted to a chromium(III)
ion. The extent of the color change is then related to actual
blood-alcohol content. The device is very accurate, because the chemical
reaction on which the device is based is very predictable. This is an
example of an oxidation-reduction reaction.

^Courtesy\\ of\\ Senior\\ Airman\\ Natasha\\ Stannard,\\ US\\ Air\\ Force.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Breathalyzer\_study.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686168] -->

# Nature of Oxidation and Reduction {#22.html#x-ck12-TmF0dXJlIG9mIE94aWRhdGlvbiBhbmQgUmVkdWN0aW9u}

## Lesson Objectives {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-o9h}

-   List three ways in which oxidation has been defined.
-   List three ways in which reduction has been defined.
-   Identify oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions.
-   Identify common oxidizing agents and reducing agents.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-izf}

-   **oxidation-reduction reaction** : A chemical reaction in which one
    substance is being oxidized and another is being reduced.
-   **oxidation** : Classified by gain of oxygen atoms, loss of hydrogen
    atoms, or loss of electrons.
-   **reduction** : Classified by loss of oxygen atoms, gain of hydrogen
    atoms, or gain of electrons.
-   **oxidizing agent** : The reduced species; causes the other reactant
    to become oxidized.
-   **reducing agent** : The oxidized species; causes the other reactant
    to become reduced.

## Check Your Understanding {#22.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-wvt}

What happens when metallic sodium is added to water?

## Introduction {#22.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-msu}

What do the rusting of a nail, the tarnishing of silverware, and the
burning of propane gas all have in common? As you have seen, there are
many types of chemical reactions that occur depending on the combination
of reactants and the conditions under which the reactants are placed.
The processes we have just mentioned are all classified as
oxidation-reduction reactions. In this lesson you will learn some
possible ways to classify oxidation-reduction reactions based on certain
characteristics.

## Identifying Oxidation and Reduction {#22.html#x-ck12-SWRlbnRpZnlpbmcgT3hpZGF0aW9uIGFuZCBSZWR1Y3Rpb24.-xup}

If an iron nail is exposed to the elements for a long enough period of
time, it will eventually rust. This process is due to the following
reaction between metallic iron and molecular oxygen:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-1zs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-uo3">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-c5s">
<dd>
4 Fe(s) + 3 O ~2~ (g) → 2 Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-MGM4NWM0NjhiMjU4ODY5MWE0YTIxNWY0OGQyZWNhMGE.-0ph"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Stephan Ridgway" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/68132273@N00/5025566186/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235419940119.jpeg)

**Figure 22.1**

Rust on a car caused by the oxidation of iron.

</div>

The rusting process is often accelerated when the metal comes into
contact with electrolytes, such as the salts used to melt ice on streets
in the winter.

Similarly, silverware will tarnish when exposed to some
sulfur-containing compounds. The layer of black tarnish (Ag ~2~ S) can
easily be removed by cleaning the silverware with a mixture of aluminum
and baking soda:

<dl id="x-ck12-M2Y0ZWRkOGMxZmU1YTUyZjAwMGM3NmM5NTU1M2ZhMGE.-esk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2Y0ZWRkOGMxZmU1YTUyZjAwMGM3NmM5NTU1M2ZhMGE.-gfq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2Y0ZWRkOGMxZmU1YTUyZjAwMGM3NmM5NTU1M2ZhMGE.-azk">
<dd>
3 Ag ~2~ S(s) + 2 Al(s) → 6 Ag(s) + Al ~2~ S ~3~ (s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-ZTU1ZjkxNWI4MzU5ZGY3OTJjN2M3ODg5MjA3NzdkNTY.-vlm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Mgeurts/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Unpolished_and_polished_silver_artwork_pieces.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235420062537.jpeg)

**Figure 22.2**

Tarnished silver. The object on the left has tarnished. The plate on the
right and the object being held have both been polished.

</div>

Many homes are heated by burning propane gas, which combusts in the
presence of oxygen:

<dl id="x-ck12-NDdiN2Y1ZGQ2ZWQyOGI0N2RmYzk5ZDllMjFlMDNjNmU.-4wl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDdiN2Y1ZGQ2ZWQyOGI0N2RmYzk5ZDllMjFlMDNjNmU.-ivp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDdiN2Y1ZGQ2ZWQyOGI0N2RmYzk5ZDllMjFlMDNjNmU.-13p">
<dd>
CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~ + 5 O ~2~ → 3 CO ~2~ + 4 H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-ZDRhNTUxOGQyZjZkZjZjOTRhYjIyYjE5ZDljNTc4Y2Q.-zsb"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Paul Martin Lester" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fireplace_bluelight.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235420193133.jpeg)

**Figure 22.3**

Some fireplaces use propane gas rather than wood as fuel.

</div>

All of these seemingly disparate processes are examples of
**oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions** . In a redox reaction, one
substance is undergoing an **oxidation** and another is undergoing a
**reduction** . The ways in which these terms are defined have varied
over the years. The broadest definitions of oxidation and reduction are
related to oxidation numbers, which will be discussed in the following
lesson. However, many redox reactions can be identified on the basis of
earlier definitions. Three general types of oxidation processes are
listed below:

1.  Gain of oxygen – When one or more oxygen atoms are added to a
    compound over the course of a reaction, that compound is
    being oxidized. This is the oldest definition of the word and the
    origin of the name. For example, when carbon monoxide is used to
    extract iron from iron ore, the following reaction takes place:

<dl id="x-ck12-Mjc0OTBkYjkzNWYxNjQxY2ZiYTFhNDBmN2QwOGFkYWI.-vce">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Mjc0OTBkYjkzNWYxNjQxY2ZiYTFhNDBmN2QwOGFkYWI.-ehb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Mjc0OTBkYjkzNWYxNjQxY2ZiYTFhNDBmN2QwOGFkYWI.-um9">
<dd>
Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (s) + 3 CO(g) → 2 Fe(s) + 3 CO ~2~ (g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The carbon monoxide molecule is being oxidized; it gains an oxygen atom
to form carbon dioxide.

2.  Loss of hydrogen – When one or more hydrogen atoms leave a compound
    during a chemical reaction, this is often a type of oxidation. For
    example, when ethanol reacts with potassium dichromate, the ethanol
    molecule loses two hydrogen atoms:

<dl id="x-ck12-M2Y4ZjcxNzA2NDBmOTBiODM5YmU1NTdhMzE4MDVmNGE.-t6u">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2Y4ZjcxNzA2NDBmOTBiODM5YmU1NTdhMzE4MDVmNGE.-uie">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2Y4ZjcxNzA2NDBmOTBiODM5YmU1NTdhMzE4MDVmNGE.-0bf">
<dd>
CH ~3~ CH ~2~ OH (ethanol) → CH ~3~ CHO (acetaldehyde)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this process, ethanol is being oxidized to form acetaldehyde. The
other components of the reaction are not shown, in order to highlight
the oxidation.

It should be noted that not all losses of hydrogen are oxidations. For
example, in the previous chapter on *Acids and Bases* , we saw many
reactions in which a hydrogen ion is transferred from an acid to a base.
However, because H ^+^ is being transferred but all of the electrons
remain with their original compounds, this is actually *not* an
oxidation process. This distinction will become clearer in the next
lesson when we introduce the concept of oxidation numbers.

3.  Loss of electrons – If an atom, ion, or molecule loses one or more
    electrons during a reaction, it is being oxidized. For example, when
    a neutral metal is converted to a metal cation, the metal is
    being oxidized. An example would be the reaction of metallic sodium
    with water:

<dl id="x-ck12-MDBjMjU4NGZkM2Q5ZTMzZjlkODVmYzE4MzZlOWEzNmU.-vrc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MDBjMjU4NGZkM2Q5ZTMzZjlkODVmYzE4MzZlOWEzNmU.-xed">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MDBjMjU4NGZkM2Q5ZTMzZjlkODVmYzE4MzZlOWEzNmU.-e4r">
<dd>
2 Na(s) + 2 H ~2~ O(l) → 2 NaOH(aq) + H ~2~ (g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Over the course of this reaction, neutral sodium atoms are being
converted to sodium cations (Na ^+^ ). This net loss of an electron is a
common type of oxidation.

The opposite of each of these criteria generally indicates that a
reduction is occurring.

1.  Loss of oxygen – When one or more oxygen atoms are removed from a
    compound, it is generally being reduced. Look again at the reaction
    between ferric oxide and carbon monoxide:

<dl id="x-ck12-Mjc0OTBkYjkzNWYxNjQxY2ZiYTFhNDBmN2QwOGFkYWI.-7nk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Mjc0OTBkYjkzNWYxNjQxY2ZiYTFhNDBmN2QwOGFkYWI.-zav">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Mjc0OTBkYjkzNWYxNjQxY2ZiYTFhNDBmN2QwOGFkYWI.-yz2">
<dd>
Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (s) + 3 CO(g) → 2 Fe(s) + 3 CO ~2~ (g)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Oxygen atoms are being removed from the iron oxide, so that component is
being reduced. The term reduction originated from this type of process,
where a metal oxide is “reduced” to its pure metal form by treating it
with the appropriate chemicals.

2.  Addition of hydrogen – The oxidation of ethanol (shown above) can be
    reversed by reacting acetaldehyde with hydrogen gas in the presence
    of an appropriate catalyst:

<dl id="x-ck12-NGU5MmYwZmExNDU5YmQzZjhiMzZhYWUyMTRjNWE5OTU.-opa">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGU5MmYwZmExNDU5YmQzZjhiMzZhYWUyMTRjNWE5OTU.-jwp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGU5MmYwZmExNDU5YmQzZjhiMzZhYWUyMTRjNWE5OTU.-afr">
<dd>
CH ~3~ CHO(l) + H ~2~ (g) → CH ~3~ CH ~2~ OH(l)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this reaction, acetaldehyde is being reduced.

3.  Gain of electrons – When metallic sodium is treated with gaseous
    chlorine, a violent reaction occurs:

<dl id="x-ck12-OGVjNTZmMDdjZGRjMGRiNmZmZjYzNDdlZmM1NDFlMzA.-ha4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGVjNTZmMDdjZGRjMGRiNmZmZjYzNDdlZmM1NDFlMzA.-ewf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGVjNTZmMDdjZGRjMGRiNmZmZjYzNDdlZmM1NDFlMzA.-s3s">
<dd>
2 Na(s) + Cl ~2~ (g) → 2 NaCl(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
On the reactant side, we see two neutral chlorine atoms covalently
bonded into a chlorine molecule. On the product side, each chlorine atom
has gained an electron to become Cl ^-^ ions. Chlorine is being reduced
in this reaction.

Two things should be emphasized at this point. First, not all processes
that involve the gain or loss of oxygen or hydrogen are redox reactions.
Although those definitions often work well with organic (carbon-based)
compounds, there are many situations in inorganic chemistry for which
they are insufficient. Second, oxidation and reduction must always take
place together. In order for one compound to be oxidized, another must
be reduced, and vice versa. For example, based on the electron-transfer
definition, one compound must lose electrons (be oxidized) in order for
another compound to gain electrons (be reduced).

### Oxidizing and Reducing Agents {#22.html#x-ck12-T3hpZGl6aW5nIGFuZCBSZWR1Y2luZyBBZ2VudHM.-d9k}

If a species is oxidized, there must be something present to make that
process happen. This “something” is known as an **oxidizing agent** .
When something is reduced, a **reducing agent** is necessary to for the
reaction to occur. In every oxidation-reduction reaction, there is an
oxidizing agent and a reducing agent. You cannot have an
oxidation-reduction reaction without both being present.

Look again at the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-MmNjMTliNTUyYzI4ODkyZDA1YjY2OWUyMWFmMTFiNjI.-fti">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MmNjMTliNTUyYzI4ODkyZDA1YjY2OWUyMWFmMTFiNjI.-1wa">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MmNjMTliNTUyYzI4ODkyZDA1YjY2OWUyMWFmMTFiNjI.-scc">
<dd>
Fe ~2~ O ~3~ + 3 CO → 2 Fe + 3 CO ~2~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this process, carbon monoxide is being oxidized (oxygen is added),
and iron oxide is being reduced (oxygen is lost). Because the added
oxygen is provided by the iron oxide, Fe ~2~ O ~3~ is the oxidizing
agent in this reaction. Similarly, because CO is required to “remove”
oxygen from the iron oxide, carbon monoxide is the reducing agent.

We can also identify oxidizing and reducing agents in terms of which
species are undergoing each type of transformation. In a redox reaction,
the substance that is oxidized causes the other substance to be reduced;
it is therefore the reducing agent. The substance that is reduced causes
the other substance to be oxidized; it is therefore the oxidizing agent.

## Lesson Summary {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-fzv}

-   Oxidation often involves the loss of hydrogen, the gain of oxygen,
    or the loss of electrons.
-   Reduction often involves the gain of hydrogen, the loss of oxygen,
    or the gain of electrons.
-   An oxidizing agent causes the oxidation of another species in
    the reaction.
-   A reducing agent causes the reduction of another species in
    the reaction.
-   Oxidations and reductions always take place together; you cannot
    have a complete reaction in which only one of the two processes
    is occurring.

## Lesson Review Questions {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-dyx}

1.  Explain in your own words the following oxidation processes:
    1.  Gain of oxygen
    2.  Loss of hydrogen
    3.  Loss of electrons

2.  Explain in your own words the following reduction processes:
    1.  Loss of oxygen
    2.  Gain of hydrogen
    3.  Gain of electrons

3.  What is the purpose of the oxidizing agent?
4.  What is the purpose of the reducing agent?
5.  In each of the following reactions, indicate which substance is
    oxidized, which is reduced, which is the oxidizing agent, and which
    is the reducing agent:
    1.  Mg + 2 HCl → MgCl ~2~ + H ~2~
    2.  2 Fe + 3 V ~2~ O ~3~ → Fe ~2~ O ~3~ + 6 VO
    3.  2 Na + FeCl ~2~ → 2 NaCl + Fe
    4.  AgNO ~3~ + Cu → CuNO ~3~ + Ag
    5.  2 Na + 2 H ~2~ O → 2 NaOH + H ~2~

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#22.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-5ej}

-   Oxidation-reduction basics:
    [http://library.kcc.hawaii.edu/external/chemistry/basic\_model.html](basic_model.html)
-   Oxidation-reduction video:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a6RR4kPsnlE](watch?v=a6RR4kPsnlE)

## Points to Consider {#22.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-ay3}

-   How can we tell which species are oxidized and which are reduced in
    a complex reaction?
-   What types of reactions are redox reactions?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686168] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686169] -->

# Oxidation Numbers {#22.html#x-ck12-T3hpZGF0aW9uIE51bWJlcnM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-z1o}

-   Be able to assign an oxidation number to each atom in a compound
    based on the given set of guidelines.
-   Determine whether an atom is oxidized or reduced based on changes in
    oxidation number over the course of a chemical reaction.
-   Give examples of typical oxidation-reduction reactions.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-gk9}

-   **oxidation number** : The charge that an atom would have if all
    polar covalent and ionic bonds resulted in a complete transfer of
    electrons from the less electronegative atom to the more
    electronegative one. Also referred to as oxidation state.

## Check Your Understanding {#22.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-bvt}

1.  If a neutral iron atom were to lose one, two, or three electrons,
    what would the charge be on each of the resulting ions?
2.  If a neutral chlorine atom were to gain an electron during a
    reaction with another chemical species, what would be the charge of
    the resulting chloride ion? Is it likely that a chlorine atom would
    gain more than one electron? Why or why not?
3.  How many valence electrons would be assigned to aluminum and oxygen
    before and after the following reaction takes place?

<dl id="x-ck12-YWMxY2QzYzRiYzI3ZjIxNTE0MGY0MDU4NDlmZDA1ZDY.-exp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWMxY2QzYzRiYzI3ZjIxNTE0MGY0MDU4NDlmZDA1ZDY.-vg4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWMxY2QzYzRiYzI3ZjIxNTE0MGY0MDU4NDlmZDA1ZDY.-rnm">
<dd>
4 Al + 3 O ~2~ → 2 Al ~2~ O ~3~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
## Introduction {#22.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-0a4}

In the previous lesson, we looked at the rusting of iron as an example
of an oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction.

<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-OWI3N2Y0MDc0NTBlYjc1ZWZkODMyNzA1MTQ3ODZiN2Q.-c8b"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Lagui, 2014" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235420308520.jpeg)

**Figure 22.4**

An ancient cannon covered in rust.

</div>

The formation of rust is summarized by the following chemical equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-lqs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-ifv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-gr0">
<dd>
4 Fe(s) + 3 O ~2~ (g) → 2 Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Based on the definition of a redox reaction as an electron-transfer
process, we can easily see that rusting is a redox reaction. Metallic
iron is losing electrons (being oxidized), and nonmetallic oxygen is
gaining electrons (being reduced). The result is an ionic compound
composed of metal cations and nonmetal anions. There are many other
examples of redox reactions between metals and nonmetals to make ionic
compounds. However, not all redox reactions are so obvious. For example,
consider the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-OWE5ZjUzOTExNTMyOTU1MzA0NzY1MTlmMjg5YjA3ODU.-az8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWE5ZjUzOTExNTMyOTU1MzA0NzY1MTlmMjg5YjA3ODU.-pc4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWE5ZjUzOTExNTMyOTU1MzA0NzY1MTlmMjg5YjA3ODU.-mvx">
<dd>
3 Cu ~2~ + 14 HNO ~3~ → 6 Cu(NO ~3~ ) ~2~ + 2 NO + 7 H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Is this a redox reaction? If so, what is being oxidized, and what is
being reduced? As it turns out, this is a redox reaction. In order to
determine whether electron transfers are occurring, chemists have
developed a system of assigning electrons to various atoms. By assigning
each valence electron in a compound to a particular atom, each atom can
be given an oxidation number. In this lesson, we will learn how to
determine the oxidation numbers for atoms in various compounds and how
to use that information to identify whether a given reaction is a redox
process.

## Rules for Assigning Oxidation Numbers {#22.html#x-ck12-UnVsZXMgZm9yIEFzc2lnbmluZyBPeGlkYXRpb24gTnVtYmVycw.._1-ght}

Overall, the **oxidation number** (or *oxidation state* ) of an atom is
the charge that the atom would have if all polar covalent and ionic
bonds resulted in a complete transfer of electrons from the less
electronegative atom to the more electronegative one. Oxidation numbers
can be assigned by looking at the Lewis structure for a given substance,
but for many simpler compounds, they can also be assigned using the set
of rules outlined below.

First, the oxidation numbers for the atoms in any substance or compound
must add up to the overall charge of that species. As a result:

1.  The atoms in any neutral elemental substance each have an oxidation
    state of zero. This includes neutral metals (e.g., Na, Be, K),
    diatomic molecules of a single element (e.g., H ~2~ , Br ~2~ , O ~2~
    ), and sometimes more complex structures (e.g., P ~4~ , S ~8~ ).
2.  Monatomic ions have an oxidation number equal to their charge. Li
    ^+^ has an oxidation state of +1, Ba ^2+^ has an oxidation state of
    +2, I ^-^ has an oxidation state of -1, and so on.
3.  If we know the oxidation numbers for all but one of the atoms in a
    substance, we can deduce the oxidation state of the unknown atom by
    comparing the sum of the other oxidation states with the overall
    charge of the compound or ion (this will be illustrated with
    examples later).

Additionally, many elements take on the same oxidation number in most or
all of their compounds.

1.  Elements with very low electronegativity values tend to lose all of
    their valence electrons when present in a compound, so the resulting
    oxidation state is equal to the number of valence electrons in the
    neutral atom.
    1.  Alkali metals have an oxidation state of +1 in their compounds.
        Although neutral alkali metals still have an oxidation state of
        zero, as soon as they react with other elements, alkali metals
        tend to give up their single valence electron, resulting in a
        charge of +1.
    2.  Alkaline earth metals have an oxidation state of +2 in
        their compounds. The reasoning is the same as for the Group
        1 metals.
    3.  Aluminum tends to have an oxidation state of +3 in
        its compounds. However, this is not always the case for some of
        the more electronegative members of Group 13.

2.  Elements with very high electronegativity values often have an
    oxidation number equal to the charge of the ion that would be formed
    in order to attain a noble gas configuration.
    1.  Fluorine has an oxidation state of -1 in all of its compounds.
        Because fluorine is the most electronegative element, it is
        assigned any shared electrons. The only way for fluorine to have
        a stable octet without an oxidation state of -1 is for it to be
        bonded to another fluorine atom. (The oxidation state of
        fluorine in F ~2~ is zero.)
    2.  Oxygen has an oxidation state of -2 in most of its compounds.
        Oxygen is the second most electronegative element, so it also
        tends to be assigned all shared electrons. Exceptions include O
        ~2~ (oxidation state = 0), peroxides, in which two oxygen atoms
        are connected by a single bond (oxidation state usually = -1),
        and any compound in which oxygen is bonded to fluorine (pretty
        rare and reactive).
    3.  Other halides often have an oxidation state of -1, but this
        trend breaks down when they are bonded to more electronegative
        atoms, such as nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine.

3.  The oxidation state of hydrogen can also be predicted based on the
    atoms to which it is bonded.
    1.  As with other pure elements, hydrogen has an oxidation state of
        zero in H ~2~ .
    2.  When bonded to other nonmetals, which are nearly all *more*
        electronegative than hydrogen, hydrogen has an oxidation state
        of +1.
    3.  When bonded to metals, which are nearly all *less*
        electronegative than hydrogen, hydrogen has an oxidation state
        of -1.

Other elements also have preferred oxidation numbers when forming
compounds, but we must look at the additional elements in the compound
to know which of these states is present. Some preferred oxidation
states for various transition metals are shown in **Table**
[below](#22.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6T3hpZGF0aW9uLVN0YXRlcw..) .

<div id="22.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6T3hpZGF0aW9uLVN0YXRlcw..">

[![](images/table.png)](table_22-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

This table shows some of the possible oxidation states found in
compounds of the transition metals. A solid circle represents a common
oxidation state, and a ring represents a less common (energetically less
favorable) oxidation state.

For many compounds, all of the atoms can be assigned an oxidation state
based on the rules above. Sometimes, there will be one atom in a
compound whose oxidation state is not as easy to predict as the others.
When this is the case, we can make use of the fact that the sum of the
oxidation states must equal the overall charge of the compound. Let's
take a look at how this might work:

**Example 22.1**

Assign oxidation numbers to each atom in the compound KMnO ~4~ .

*Answer:*

Potassium is an alkali metal, so we would expect it to have an oxidation
state of +1, and we can assume that oxygen has an oxidation state of -2.
Overall, this is a neutral compound, so the sum of all the oxidation
states must equal zero. Therefore:

<dl id="x-ck12-NWU1MTQyYWE3ZjM4OTkxYjNlNTg2ZWRiZDVlMzc0OGU.-iwv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWU1MTQyYWE3ZjM4OTkxYjNlNTg2ZWRiZDVlMzc0OGU.-mbx">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWU1MTQyYWE3ZjM4OTkxYjNlNTg2ZWRiZDVlMzc0OGU.-aj9">
<dd>
K + Mn + 4(O) = 0

</dd>
<dd>
+1 + Mn + 4(-2) = 0

</dd>
<dd>
Mn - 7 = 0

</dd>
<dd>
Mn = +7

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this compound, manganese has an oxidation state of +7. Note that we
must include an oxidation state of -2 for *each* of the four oxygen
atoms. Let's look at another example.

**Example 22.2**

What is the oxidation state of iron in Fe ~2~ O ~3~ ? Does it have a
different oxidation state in FeCl ~4~ ^2-^ ?

*Answer:*

In the first compound, we can assume that oxygen has an oxidation state
of -2, since it is bonded to a metal, which would be significantly less
electronegative.

<dl id="x-ck12-MWM0OTExZWNmZDk1ZDY4YzZjMWEyZjNhYzczZjU4YWE.-gh3">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWM0OTExZWNmZDk1ZDY4YzZjMWEyZjNhYzczZjU4YWE.-q2f">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWM0OTExZWNmZDk1ZDY4YzZjMWEyZjNhYzczZjU4YWE.-akg">
<dd>
2(Fe) + 3(O) = 0

</dd>
<dd>
2(Fe) + 3(-2) = 0

</dd>
<dd>
2(Fe) - 6 = 0

</dd>
<dd>
2(Fe) = +6

</dd>
<dd>
Fe = +3

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In iron(III) oxide, iron has an oxidation state of +3. Note that this is
the same as its charge when we dissociate this compound into its ions.
Because the polyatomic ion has an overall charge, the oxidation states
in FeCl ~4~ ^2-^ will add up to -2, not zero. We can assume that
chlorine has an oxidation state of -1, because it is bonded to a metal
and not a very electronegative nonmetal.

<dl id="x-ck12-NmFiYTcyZGQ4MGQ2ZWY5YjJjZDE2N2IzZWNkYmJjYjI.-go8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NmFiYTcyZGQ4MGQ2ZWY5YjJjZDE2N2IzZWNkYmJjYjI.-fwg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NmFiYTcyZGQ4MGQ2ZWY5YjJjZDE2N2IzZWNkYmJjYjI.-5g3">
<dd>
Fe + 4(Cl) = -2

</dd>
<dd>
Fe + 4(-1) = -2

</dd>
<dd>
Fe - 4 = -2

</dd>
<dd>
Fe = +2

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this ion, iron has an oxidation state of +2. Both of these are common
oxidation states for iron, so we must look at the surrounding atoms to
determine which is present in a given compound.

## Identifying and Analyzing Redox Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-SWRlbnRpZnlpbmcgYW5kIEFuYWx5emluZyBSZWRveCBSZWFjdGlvbnM._1-2kv}

The system of assigning oxidation numbers allows for a more general
definition of redox reactions. A redox process is one in which the
oxidation numbers of one or more atoms change over the course of the
reaction. Any atom whose oxidation number becomes more positive (or less
negative) is being oxidized, and an atom whose oxidation number becomes
more negative (or less positive) is being reduced. By assigning
oxidation numbers to each atom in a reaction, we can determine whether
or not it is a redox reaction.

In our previous chapter on *Chemical Reactions* , we talked about
various different ways that reactions could be classified. Some of the
reaction types we studied included combination (synthesis),
decomposition, single and double replacement, and combustion. Any of
these general reaction types may also be a redox reaction. In this
section, we will look at examples of redox reactions that fall into each
of these categories.

### Combination Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-Q29tYmluYXRpb24gUmVhY3Rpb25z_1-bnp}

In combination or synthesis reactions, two chemical species combine to
produce a new compound. The general expression for a combination
reaction is:

<dl id="x-ck12-OGFlMThkYTZhYWUzZjNkMjA1YTE2OWEwZTE5YjQ1ZTE.-0qz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGFlMThkYTZhYWUzZjNkMjA1YTE2OWEwZTE5YjQ1ZTE.-n1u">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGFlMThkYTZhYWUzZjNkMjA1YTE2OWEwZTE5YjQ1ZTE.-tpm">
<dd>
A + B → C

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
One example of this type of reaction is the rusting of iron, which we
have already looked at extensively in this chapter:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-lqe">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-adr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWMzNTQwYzlmNzZmMDEyN2ZkNWE2ODdiZTFiZDJmYjE.-47n">
<dd>
4 Fe(s) + 3 O ~2~ (g) → 2 Fe ~2~ O ~3~ (s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Here is a short video showing the oxidation of iron.

[![](ck12_22_files/tmpYGujBf.jpeg)](5MDH92VxPEQ%3Fwmode%3Dtransparent%26rel%3D0%26hash%3D2b828a6258c8491147b087f4b489ff31)

Click on the image above for more content

We saw in example problem 22.2 that the oxidation states of the atoms in
iron (III) oxide are +3 for iron and -2 for oxygen. The atoms in the
reactants are all pure elemental substances, so they have oxidation
numbers of zero. Over the course of this reaction, iron is being
oxidized (from 0 to +3), and oxygen is being reduced (from 0 to -2).

There are many other examples of redox reactions in which two neutral
elements combine to make a compound. These often take the form of a
metal being oxidized and a nonmetal being reduced, resulting in an ionic
compound. Two nonmetallic elements can also undergo a redox reaction of
this type, in which the less electronegative element is oxidized and the
more electronegative element is reduced.

### Decomposition Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-RGVjb21wb3NpdGlvbiBSZWFjdGlvbnM._1-rho}

A decomposition process is the exact opposite of a combination process;
one reactant compound breaks down into two or more products:

<dl id="x-ck12-MjhmMDAxZGNhYWIzZGJlNmYwMGFiYjFiNjI4M2RkOGU.-rt1">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjhmMDAxZGNhYWIzZGJlNmYwMGFiYjFiNjI4M2RkOGU.-rmg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MjhmMDAxZGNhYWIzZGJlNmYwMGFiYjFiNjI4M2RkOGU.-8vv">
<dd>
C → A + B

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
For example, hydrogen peroxide will decompose over time to produce water
and oxygen gas. The equation is written below, along with the oxidation
numbers for each atom:

![\\mathrm{ 2\\overset{+1}{H}\_2\\overset{-1}{O}\_2\\rightarrow
2\\overset{+1}{H}\_2\\overset{-2}{O} +
\\overset{0}{O}\_2}](ck12_math_images_dir/1a7152e6581cfa55518b362b0dc0ea44.png)

In this reaction, some atoms of oxygen are being reduced to water (from
-1 to -2), while others are being oxidized to molecular oxygen (from -1
to 0). For a redox decomposition reaction, the single reactant must act
as both the oxidizing agent and the reducing agent. This is one type of
reaction that is very difficult to recognize as a redox reaction by any
of the previous definitions of oxidation and reduction; oxidation
numbers must be assigned in order to see that changes in oxidation state
are occurring.

### Single Replacement Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-U2luZ2xlIFJlcGxhY2VtZW50IFJlYWN0aW9ucw.._1-veh}

Single replacement reactions are quite common and often include a pure
metal reacting with an aqueous solution of an acid or a salt. They have
the following generic form:

<dl id="x-ck12-OWFiN2NlMDM4NzkzNWNjNzUxZjgyNDFmZjQ2ZDgyNGQ.-bng">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWFiN2NlMDM4NzkzNWNjNzUxZjgyNDFmZjQ2ZDgyNGQ.-1iv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWFiN2NlMDM4NzkzNWNjNzUxZjgyNDFmZjQ2ZDgyNGQ.-s3v">
<dd>
A + BC → AC + B

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
When a reactive enough pure metal is placed in an acidic solution, the
following reaction often takes place:

<dl id="x-ck12-NjUxN2IwMGM1MzNjNGIyM2Q1MzQ1NWUyZDc5ZDgzYTg.-rw0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjUxN2IwMGM1MzNjNGIyM2Q1MzQ1NWUyZDc5ZDgzYTg.-cuv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjUxN2IwMGM1MzNjNGIyM2Q1MzQ1NWUyZDc5ZDgzYTg.-mdo">
<dd>
Metal + acid → metal salt + hydrogen gas

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
For example, if a piece of solid zinc is added to a solution of HCl,
hydrogen bubbles will immediately start to form on the surface of the
zinc:

<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-OGM3M2QwMmZiNGI4ODdmNDU1MjM5MTNiMmU0NTA3YTg.-tnr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn_reaction_with_HCl.JPG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235420420284.jpeg)

**Figure 22.5**

Zinc metal reacting with a solution of hydrochloric acid. Notice the
hydrogen bubbles surrounding the zinc metal.

</div>

At the same time, some of the zinc atoms are released into the solution
as Zn ^2+^ cations. The balanced chemical equation for this single
displacement reaction is shown below.

![\\mathrm{\\overset{0}{Zn} + 2\\overset {+1} H \\overset {-1}{Cl}
\\rightarrow \\overset{+2}{Zn}\\overset{-1}{Cl}\_2 + \\overset 0 H\_2
}](ck12_math_images_dir/ed5bf541256a516be774a8ac4082c43f.png)

Notice how the oxidation states change for the elements involved in this
process. One pure element (with an oxidation state of 0) is being
oxidized (in this case, to an oxidation state of +2), and a cationic
species (H ^+^ , which has an oxidation state of +1) is being reduced to
a neutral element (H ~2~ , which has an oxidation state of 0). In this
reaction, the chloride anion is acting as a spectator ion, so its form
(and its oxidation state) does not change.

Another example of a single displacement reaction is when a solid metal
is placed in a solution containing cations of a less reactive metal. The
metal in the solid phase will dissolve into solution as a cation, and
the metal cations in solution will precipitate out of solution as a
solid metal. For example, if we were to place a piece of zinc in a
solution of an iron salt, the following process would take place:

![ \\mathrm{\\overset{0}{Zn} +
\\overset{+2}{Fe}\\overset{+6}S\\overset{-2}O\_4 \\rightarrow
\\overset{0}{Fe} +
\\overset{+2}{Zn}\\overset{+6}S\\overset{-2}O\_4}](ck12_math_images_dir/6b1bba0e25d71e4c56c9ec405a02b5c3.png)

Notice that the oxidation states only change for the two metal species.
Zinc is oxidized from 0 to +2 and Fe is reduced from +2 to 0. The
oxidation states of the elements in the spectator ion (SO ~4~ ^2-^ ) do
not change.

### Combustion Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-Q29tYnVzdGlvbiBSZWFjdGlvbnM._1-fot}

In a combustion reaction, a hydrocarbon reacts with molecular oxygen to
produce carbon dioxide and water. The molecular oxygen (oxidation state
= 0) is reduced (oxidation state = -2 in both CO ~2~ and H ~2~ O), while
the carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon are oxidized (to +4 in carbon
dioxide). A familiar combustion reaction involves the burning of fossil
fuels to produce heat or electricity, or to power a motor vehicle or
other machine. The process of cellular respiration, in which our bodies
break down sugar molecules into water and carbon dioxide in order to
harness the resulting release of energy, can also be thought of as a
form of combustion, albeit a relatively slow and complex one. Cellular
respiration in our bodies is governed by a series of enzymatic steps,
whereas burning a marshmallow in a hot fire is a fast and uncontrolled
reaction. However, the gradual digestion and the fast combustion of
sucrose both result in the same net reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-NGIyNmE3ODQyMTVlNDBhZjA1ZGJlMWM2MGYzZTY5MzM.-csi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGIyNmE3ODQyMTVlNDBhZjA1ZGJlMWM2MGYzZTY5MzM.-tmz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGIyNmE3ODQyMTVlNDBhZjA1ZGJlMWM2MGYzZTY5MzM.-wmv">
<dd>
C ~12~ H ~22~ O ~11~ (sucrose) + 12 O ~2~ → 12 CO ~2~ + 11 H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-OGIxNjZhYTRlZjk2MmU1NmY3ZTAzYWFmM2M4YmY2NjY.-qpu"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="JMR Photography" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/29650319@N06/3441139925/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235420529478.jpeg)

**Figure 22.6**

Combustion reaction of a marshmallow (sucrose) and wood (cellulose).

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-zsl}

-   Oxidation numbers can be defined for each atom in a compound based
    on a set of rules.
-   Oxidation and reduction are currently defined according to changes
    in oxidation number over the course of a reaction.
-   All elements have an oxidation number of zero in their pure form.
-   Many elements have only one common oxidation state in
    chemical compounds. These can serve as guidelines for determining
    the oxidation states of more variable elements, using the fact that
    all oxidation states in a chemical species must add up to the
    overall charge of the atom, molecule, compound, or ion.
-   Examples of redox reactions are found in various categories of
    chemical reactions, including combination, decomposition, single
    replacement, and combustion.

## Lesson Review Questions {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-cyp}

1.  Determine the oxidation number for the indicated element.
    1.  calcium metal
    2.  F in NaF
    3.  S in Na ~2~ SO ~4~
    4.  Cl in KClO ~3~
    5.  Ca in CaO

2.  State the type of reaction illustrated by each of the
    following equations.
    1.  ZnS + 2 O ~2~ → ZnSO ~4~
    2.  Fe + CuSO ~4~ → FeSO ~4~ + Cu
    3.  2KClO ~3~ → 2KCl + 3O ~2~
    4.  2Hg + O ~2~ → 2HgO

3.  For each reaction in problem 2, indicate which atom was oxidized and
    which was reduced. Show the changes in oxidation number in
    each case.
4.  Running a strong enough electric current through water will cause it
    to decompose into hydrogen and oxygen gas. Write the balanced
    chemical equation for this process. What is being oxidized, and what
    is being reduced?
5.  Write the balanced chemical equation for the following reaction,
    including all oxidation numbers: Magnesium metal is placed in a
    solution of hydrochloric acid.
6.  Write the balanced chemical equation for the following combination
    reaction: Hydrogen and oxygen gas react explosively to
    produce water. Which substance is being oxidized, and which is being
    reduced?
7.  Write the chemical equation for the following combustion reaction,
    including all oxidation numbers: Methanol (CH ~3~ OH) combusts in
    the presence of oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water.
8.  Assign oxidation numbers to each of the atoms in the following
    compounds/ions:

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#22.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-l69}

-   Determining oxidation numbers:
    [http://www.occc.edu/kmbailey/chem1115tutorials/oxidation\_numbers.htm](oxidation_numbers.htm)
-   Common types of oxidation-reduction reactions:
    [http://www.wisc-online.com/objects/ViewObject.aspx?ID=GCH7904](ViewObject.aspx?ID=GCH7904)
-   Combustion of magnesium metal:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m2i9jLPXprQ](watch?v=m2i9jLPXprQ)

## Points to Consider {#22.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-t6a}

-   Why do you suppose oxidation numbers are used to describe the
    mechanics of redox processes? Why can’t the charge of a given
    chemical species suffice?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686169] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686170] -->

# Balancing Redox Equations {#22.html#x-ck12-QmFsYW5jaW5nIFJlZG94IEVxdWF0aW9ucw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-alt}

-   Be able to write half-reactions for oxidation-reduction processes.
-   Be able to distinguish the oxidation half-reaction from the
    reduction half-reaction.
-   Be able to balance redox reactions.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-bhs}

-   **half-reaction** : Describes half of the redox reaction process.

## Check Your Understanding {#22.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-cio}

Study the following diagram, which depicts the mass change that occurs
when steel wool burns in air.

<div
id="22.html#x-ck12-ZTUxYzlmODlmOGQwNTQwNGM5OGZmYjg4ODlkNTBkYzQ.-ivy"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jodi So" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_22_files/20151009235420661338.png)

**Figure 22.7**

Mass changes for steel wool burning in air.

</div>

What happens to the mass of the steel wool as the reaction proceeds?
Given that mass must be conserved in chemical reactions (it cannot come
from nowhere), what is your explanation for the change in the mass of
the steel wool?

## Introduction {#22.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-pal}

You have already learned the basic methods for balancing chemical
equations to describe chemical reactions. Sometimes complicated
reactions can be identified as redox reactions, in which case a special
method of balancing chemical equations can be used to simplify the
process and prevent unnecessary guessing and checking. In this lesson
you will learn how to use this method.

## Oxidation-Reduction Half-Reactions {#22.html#x-ck12-T3hpZGF0aW9uLVJlZHVjdGlvbiBIYWxmLVJlYWN0aW9ucw.._2-yxv}

In some cases, it can be helpful to analyze the oxidation and reduction
processes separately for a complete redox reaction. A **half-reaction**
contains only half of the entire redox process. One half-reaction
illustrates the oxidation component and is the oxidation half-reaction;
the other illustrates the reduction component and is the reduction
half-reaction. For example, consider the following combination reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-a5r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-g7n">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-w0s">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{ZnS(aq) + 2 O\_2(g) \\to
ZnSO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/97f1e8359272e93e9d68053e359c4c4e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
First, we need to assign oxidation states to each atom. Some of these
compounds have multiple atoms for which the oxidation states are not
easily predicted. However, if we convert this to an ionic equation, our
task becomes simpler:

<dl id="x-ck12-oon">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-skd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-wne">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Zn\^{2+}(aq) + S\^{2-}(aq) + 2 O\_2(g) \\to Zn\^{2+}(aq) +
SO\_4\^{2-}(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/1e90d9228c91e59f2af76e36179f425b.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
On the reactant side, each component is a pure element, so the oxidation
states are simply equal to the charge of the ion or molecule. Zinc has
an oxidation state of +2, sulfur is -2, and oxygen is 0. Now look at the
product side. Zinc is still a monatomic ion with a charge of +2, so
nothing has changed. Zinc is a spectator ion. In the sulfate ion, we can
assume that oxygen has its usual oxidation state of -2. The oxidation
state of sulfur can then be calculated as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZWZiM2EwZTQxNWZjNzhlZjBkNDM2YTFhZGYxMGJkMmU.-ohj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGViZjAxOTk4YmEwMTU0MDMwZTkzOWY2ZjQ2MTEzOTM.-yls">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGViZjAxOTk4YmEwMTU0MDMwZTkzOWY2ZjQ2MTEzOTM.-awg">
<dd>
S + 4(O) = -2

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWQ5MWRiM2MxMmQxZWFmMTY3NWI4YmQzOTVlMmI5MzY.-jlm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YWQ5MWRiM2MxMmQxZWFmMTY3NWI4YmQzOTVlMmI5MzY.-wni">
<dd>
S + 4(-2) = -2

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGQ4NjRiMGExYTcxMGU0YTM5MTdiZDA0NTM3Y2IxN2Y.-cc6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OGQ4NjRiMGExYTcxMGU0YTM5MTdiZDA0NTM3Y2IxN2Y.-6wk">
<dd>
S - 8 = -2

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Yzc1ZGI3YzBiNDI0ZDZlMDE4MjVhYmQ0NGVjZDRhMmQ.-m2p">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Yzc1ZGI3YzBiNDI0ZDZlMDE4MjVhYmQ0NGVjZDRhMmQ.-rmf">
<dd>
S = +6

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Based on the changes in oxidation number, we can identify the oxidation
and reduction processes separately. The oxidized element, sulfur, is
losing electrons, and the reduced element, oxygen, is gaining them. The
superscript of zero on the reactant oxygen atom simply indicates that it
begins with an oxidation state of 0.

<dl id="x-ck12-ODI2YThjNjRiOTk5ODEzN2RjYzcyMzY5ZTM5NjU1YWU.-7nq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzQ3ZDgyYzQ5MTkzYjM5ZjhiZWFjZjY5Y2U5ZjgwZmE.-hzc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzQ3ZDgyYzQ5MTkzYjM5ZjhiZWFjZjY5Y2U5ZjgwZmE.-kn5">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{S\^{2-} \\to S\^{6+} +
8e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/99f29e0b8c67d57c2639ee4f97e57d0b.png)
Oxidation Half-Reaction

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTUzOGE1MmU5YTg1NWZiY2VmMTRhN2YxMDJhZWU4MjA.-nky">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTUzOGE1MmU5YTg1NWZiY2VmMTRhN2YxMDJhZWU4MjA.-blc">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{O\^{0} + 2e\^- \\to
O\^{2-}}](ck12_math_images_dir/49b50c3eb6e330030171d953f17e96e7.png)
Reduction Half-Reaction

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Note that these are purely theoretical processes. Sulfur does not
physically become an ion with a charge of +6, because electrons are not
fully transferred from the sulfur anion to the oxygen atoms.
Additionally, the oxygen atoms don't exist as neutral, isolated species;
they are always covalently bonded to at least one other atom. However,
being able to break a reaction down into theoretical half-reactions is a
useful tool, as we will see in the next section and in the following
chapter on *Electrochemistry* .

## Using Half-Reactions to Balance Equations {#22.html#x-ck12-VXNpbmcgSGFsZi1SZWFjdGlvbnMgdG8gQmFsYW5jZSBFcXVhdGlvbnM._2-w4r}

One use for half-reactions is to help balance very complex chemical
equations. We will illustrate the overall process with a simple reaction
first. Let's say that we were given the *unbalanced* version of the
combination reaction from the previous section.

<dl id="x-ck12-idz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-dgq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-dhb">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{ZnS(aq) + O\_2(g) \\to
ZnSO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/012a6675c3ad01897eaf4fd7a68b8de4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Pretend for a moment that this was not a very easy equation to balance
by trial and error. We determined that this could be broken down into
the following half-reactions:

<dl id="x-ck12-ktl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ffj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gxx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{S\^{2-} \\to S\^{6+} +
8e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/99f29e0b8c67d57c2639ee4f97e57d0b.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-dru">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ix0">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{O\^{0} + 2e\^- \\to
O\^{2-}}](ck12_math_images_dir/49b50c3eb6e330030171d953f17e96e7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In the complete reaction, both of these processes occur simultaneously.
However, free electrons are not actually a reactant or product of this
reaction. In order for the electrons to cancel out, we would need the
number of electrons lost by oxidation to be equal to the number gained
during reduction. This can be accomplished by multiplying the entire
second reaction by 4:

<dl id="x-ck12-am4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fxk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-soz">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{S\^{2-} \\to S\^{6+} +
8e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/99f29e0b8c67d57c2639ee4f97e57d0b.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-eti">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-kit">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{4O\^{0} + 8e\^- \\to
4O\^{2-}}](ck12_math_images_dir/c7493de75d5ffa52bf979e6c8c241d60.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
For the electron flow in this reaction to be balanced, four oxygen atoms
are reduced for each sulfur atom that is oxidized. Therefore, for each
unit of ZnS (which contains one sulfur atom), we would need two
molecules of O ~2~ (four oxygen atoms total). The ratio of reactants
must be the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-xap">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gao">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-p5n">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{ZnS(aq) + 2 O\_2(g) \\to
}](ck12_math_images_dir/ab5cdaaea521a6017e8feedf9ab5e410.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
We can then find the coefficient of the product (in this case, 1) by
inspection:

<dl id="x-ck12-vro">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ulh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-wrx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{ZnS(aq) + 2 O\_2(g) \\to
ZnSO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/97f1e8359272e93e9d68053e359c4c4e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Now that we have seen the basic procedure, let's try a more difficult
problem.

**Example 22.3**

Balance the following equation using the half-reaction method:

<dl id="x-ck12-lsr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qge">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qkr">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{KMnO\_4(aq) + KNO\_2(aq) + H\_2SO\_4(aq) \\to MnSO\_4(aq) +
H\_2O(l) + KNO\_3(aq) +
K\_2SO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/55b7fa856b358f0354233956ae5bb5a3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
*Answer:*

First, determine which atoms are being oxidized and which are being
reduced. In order to assign oxidation numbers, we should convert this
molecular equation into an ionic one (no coefficients are used, since we
are not starting with a balanced equation anyway):

<dl id="x-ck12-6b1">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2n8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2ut">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{K\^+(aq)+MnO\_4\^-(aq) + NO\_2\^-(aq) +
H\^+(aq)+SO\_4\^{2-}(aq) \\to Mn\^{2+}+SO\_4\^{2-}(aq) + H\_2O(l) +
K\^+(aq)+NO\_3\^-(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/5989eaa4312d64e0daae1abda57ec174.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
There are 6 elements in this reaction. All of the monatomic ions have
oxidation numbers equal to their charges. Additionally, we can assign an
oxidation state of -2 to each oxygen atom and +1 to each hydrogen atom.
Now, we just need to assign the oxidation states of manganese in MnO ~4~
^-^ , nitrogen in the nitrite and nitrate ions, and sulfur in the
sulfate ion. These can be determined by choosing a value for which all
of the oxidation states in the ion add up to its overall charge. For
example, in the nitrite ion:

<dl id="x-ck12-MjNlY2M1M2JlNjNhMjM5MTY2NTBlNTQyMmIyYWU3ZjY.-zby">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MDhkNThlZjgxM2E5ZTk4ZmY1OThhNDBiMmQ2YzJkYzQ.-pfg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MDhkNThlZjgxM2E5ZTk4ZmY1OThhNDBiMmQ2YzJkYzQ.-2qm">
<dd>
N + 2(O) = -1

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzM0YTkzZmE0ODM0ZDk0NWQzNThjY2I2YTBiZTVjMjE.-xay">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzM0YTkzZmE0ODM0ZDk0NWQzNThjY2I2YTBiZTVjMjE.-gro">
<dd>
N + 2(-2) = -1

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWVmMWYwMDc5MjU3ZjBkYTEyNGQ1YTg5YmRlMTEwZTM.-njy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWVmMWYwMDc5MjU3ZjBkYTEyNGQ1YTg5YmRlMTEwZTM.-o3j">
<dd>
N - 4 = -1

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGI0MGNiNDJhZWM3NjQ0NTBlNTJhMDM5OTU5NjkxYWY.-1rj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGI0MGNiNDJhZWM3NjQ0NTBlNTJhMDM5OTU5NjkxYWY.-3qx">
<dd>
N = +3

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Nitrogen has an oxidation number of +3 in the nitrite ion. Similar
reasoning shows us that manganese is +7 in MnO ~4~ ^-^ , nitrogen is +5
in NO ~3~ ^-^ , and sulfur is +6 in SO ~4~ ^2-^ . The only two elements
that change oxidation numbers over the course of the reaction are Mn
(from +7 in MnO ~4~ ^-^ to +2 in Mn ^2+^ ) and N (from +3 in NO ~2~ ^-^
to +5 in NO ~3~ ^-^ ). Thus, we can write the two half-reactions as
follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-o4h">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-eti">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gw2">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{N\^{3+} \\to N\^{5+} +
2e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/33a0bb026dfaa3c35e449d1b076294b4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-sku">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-vn5">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Mn\^{7+} + 5e\^- \\to
Mn\^{2+}}](ck12_math_images_dir/b5f2509b3d7de5db79b69c81433eb92c.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In order to equalize the number of electrons for these two
half-reactions, we need to multiply the oxidation portion by 5 and the
reduction portion by 2:

<dl id="x-ck12-iso">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zpf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-pfx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{5 N\^{3+} \\to 5 N\^{5+} +
10e\^-}](ck12_math_images_dir/9ef78ec643887d3268a3096edc7f5488.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ss5">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gub">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2 Mn\^{7+} + 10e\^- \\to 2
Mn\^{2+}}](ck12_math_images_dir/bafbcc255b17f176c858b3cda3345f73.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
For every five nitrogen atoms that are oxidized, two manganese atoms are
reduced. Now let's look back at the original equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-xim">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-bsh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-vsh">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{KMnO\_4(aq) + KNO\_2(aq) + H\_2SO\_4(aq) \\to MnSO\_4(aq) +
H\_2O(l) + KNO\_3(aq) +
K\_2SO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/55b7fa856b358f0354233956ae5bb5a3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Nitrogen and manganese are each in only one compound on each side of the
equation. Start by putting the coefficients from the balanced
half-reactions on their corresponding compounds:

<dl id="x-ck12-imj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qo6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jna">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2KMnO\_4(aq) + 5KNO\_2(aq) + H\_2SO\_4(aq) \\to 2MnSO\_4(aq)
+ H\_2O(l) + 5KNO\_3(aq) +
K\_2SO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/21e203bf8e1c37d0e01a99fe6fa64f81.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The coefficients for KMnO ~4~ , KNO ~2~ , MnSO ~4~ , and KNO ~3~ , are
now set, but we can alter the coefficients on H ~2~ SO ~4~ , H ~2~ O,
and K ~2~ SO ~4~ to finish balancing the equation. In order for
potassium to be balanced, the coefficient on K ~2~ SO ~4~ must be 1.

<dl id="x-ck12-iez">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-z5s">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-6fn">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2KMnO\_4(aq) + 5KNO\_2(aq) + H\_2SO\_4(aq) \\to 2MnSO\_4(aq)
+ H\_2O(l) + 5KNO\_3(aq) +
1K\_2SO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/da201c95fe516fd7ad4ed732d4900828.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Then, H ~2~ SO ~4~ is the last unbalanced compound that contains sulfur.
In order for sulfur to be balanced (3 atoms on each side), H ~2~ SO ~4~
must have a coefficient of 3.

<dl id="x-ck12-798">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-eji">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-m8h">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2KMnO\_4(aq) + 5KNO\_2(aq) + 3H\_2SO\_4(aq) \\to 2MnSO\_4(aq)
+ H\_2O(l) + 5KNO\_3(aq) +
1K\_2SO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/fe67f9c918b6cae8ba71de8e45dda570.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Finally, hydrogen and oxygen can be balanced by changing the coefficient
on H ~2~ O. There are 6 hydrogen atoms on the left side, so water would
need a coefficient of 3.

<dl id="x-ck12-cr4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-jxs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zir">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{2KMnO\_4(aq) + 5KNO\_2(aq) + 3H\_2SO\_4(aq) \\to 2MnSO\_4(aq)
+ 3H\_2O(l) + 5KNO\_3(aq) +
K\_2SO\_4(aq)}](ck12_math_images_dir/952cb95125449d10c443fe956200836a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Double-checking our oxygen atoms, we see that there are 30 on each side.
This is a fully balanced equation. Of course, most of the equations that
you will be required to balance are not this difficult. However, it does
demonstrate that using the half-reaction method gives you a good
starting point for balancing especially complicated redox reactions.

## Lesson Summary {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-h7g}

-   Oxidation-reduction half-reactions single out the changes in
    oxidation state of certain elements within a chemical equation.
-   Balancing the electrons lost and gained in two simultaneously
    occurring half-reactions can be used to help balance complicated
    redox equations.

## Lesson Review Questions {#22.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-wvd}

1.  Write half-reactions for the following redox processes:
    1.  Fe + V ~2~ O ~3~ → Fe ~2~ O ~3~ + VO
    2.  K ~2~ Cr ~2~ O ~7~ + SnCl ~2~ + HCl → CrCl ~3~ + SnCl ~4~ +
        KCl + H ~2~ O
    3.  K ~2~ Cr ~2~ O ~7~ + H ~2~ O + S → SO ~2~ + KOH + Cr ~2~ O ~3~

2.  Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions:
    1.  Magnesium carbonate is heated strongly to produce magnesium
        oxide and carbon dioxide gas.
    2.  Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to produce water and oxygen gas.
    3.  Solid potassium chlorate is heated in the presence of manganese
        dioxide as a catalyst to produce potassium chloride and
        oxygen gas.
    4.  Lead sulfide reacts with molecular oxygen to form sulfur dioxide
        and lead(II) oxide.

3.  Write oxidation and reduction half-reactions for the following
    single-replacement reaction: Fe(s) + CuSO ~4~ (aq) → FeSO ~4~ (aq)
    + Cu(s).
4.  Use the half-reaction method to balance the following redox
    equation: As ~4~ + NaOCl + H ~2~ O → NaCl + H ~3~ AsO ~4~ .

## Further Reading / Supplemental Links {#22.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFsIExpbmtz_2-ngy}

Explanation and practice for balancing redox equations:
[http://www.mpcfaculty.net/mark\_bishop/redox\_balance\_oxidation.htm](redox_balance_oxidation.htm)

## Points to Consider {#22.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-mca}

-   Although oxidation and reduction processes must occur
    simultaneously, they do not necessarily have to occur in the
    same space. How can this be used to generate electricity, which is
    essentially the flow of electrons through a wire?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686170] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#22.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-8tb}

1.  Stephan Ridgway.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/68132273@N00/5025566186/]() . CC BY
    2.0
2.  User:Mgeurts/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Unpolished\_and\_polished\_silver\_artwork\_pieces.jpg](File:Unpolished_and_polished_silver_artwork_pieces.jpg) .
    CC BY 3.0
3.  Paul Martin Lester.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fireplace\_bluelight.jpg](File:Fireplace_bluelight.jpg) .
    CC BY 3.0
4.  Image copyright Lagui, 2014.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
5.  User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zn\_reaction\_with\_HCl.JPG](File:Zn_reaction_with_HCl.JPG) .
    Public Domain
6.  JMR Photography.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/29650319@N06/3441139925/]() . CC BY
    2.0
7.  Jodi So. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="23.html"></span>

# Electrochemistry {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2NoZW1pc3RyeQ..-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_23_files/20151009235427624310.jpeg)
</span>

There is worldwide concern about the relationship between climate change
and the use of fossil fuels. Many scientists believe that increased use
of these fuels (in vehicles and other gas-powered equipment) has the
potential to irreversibly damage our environment. In addition to the
environmental concerns, supplies of fossil fuels are finite, and because
they are non-renewable energy sources, we will eventually need
alternatives. New developments in batteries and other energy storage
devices are being explored to help deal with these issues.
Electrochemical processes are at the heart of these new technologies.

^User:Pujanak/Wikimedia\\ Commons.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kewet\_electric\_car.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686172] -->

# Electrochemical Cells {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2NoZW1pY2FsIENlbGxz}

## Lesson Objectives {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-4pc}

-   Use the activity series to predict whether a given
    oxidation-reduction reaction will occur spontaneously.
-   Describe the components and function of a galvanic cell.
-   Describe how power is produced by lead-acid batteries, dry cell
    batteries, and fuel cells.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-aaf}

-   **activity series** : A ranking of various metals on their ability
    to lose electrons.
-   **galvanic cell** : A cell in which two solutions are connected by a
    wire in order to facilitate the flow of electrons and generate an
    electric current.
-   **battery** : A cell which employs oxidation-reduction reactions to
    generate a flow of electrons and supply electricity.
-   **lead-acid battery** : A battery with two poles, one of lead and
    one of lead oxide, submerged in sulfuric acid and separated by a
    barrier permeable to ions and water; typically used in cars.
-   **dry cell battery** : Contains a paste (often a mixture of ammonium
    chloride and manganese dioxide) that acts as the positive electrode.
-   **fuel cell** : A cell that is able to produce an electric current
    directly from a chemical reaction; fuel cells commonly operate on
    the platinum catalyzed reaction between hydrogen and oxygen gases to
    be used to power vehicles.

## Check Your Understanding {#23.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-sxi}

#### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#23.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ..-o0a}

-   Write half reactions for the following redox process:

<dl id="x-ck12-ODI3MmI3OTc2ZDgxNzAyYmU4OWM3NDQxZjIzOGI3YjI.-zxu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODI3MmI3OTc2ZDgxNzAyYmU4OWM3NDQxZjIzOGI3YjI.-12r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODI3MmI3OTc2ZDgxNzAyYmU4OWM3NDQxZjIzOGI3YjI.-tru">
<dd>
2 Na + Cl ~2~ → 2 NaCl

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
What is being oxidized, and what is being reduced?

## Introduction {#23.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-ma4}

Electrochemistry is the study of chemical processes that occur at the
interface between an electron conductor, such as a wire, and a solution
of electrolytes, which is often simply an ionic substance dissolved in
water. Electrochemical processes involve a transfer of electrons between
the wire and the solution. These reactions can be used to create
electrical power, to purify metals, and to carry out a number of useful
chemical transformations.

## The Activity Series {#23.html#x-ck12-VGhlIEFjdGl2aXR5IFNlcmllcw..-8c7}

In the previous chapter, we looked at a number of oxidation-reduction
reactions. We assumed that the reactions occurred as written, but how do
we know that a certain redox reaction will take place without actually
running the experiment? Which metals will react with water or acid? How
do we know if one metal will undergo a single-replacement reaction with
a solution of a different metal cation?

Detailed study has made possible the construction of an **activity
series** , sometimes referred to as the electromotive series, in which
various neutral metals are ranked by their ability to lose electrons (to
undergo oxidation). The most reactive metals are listed at the top and
will undergo a reaction simply by exposure to moisture. As we go down
the list, we find that some other metals will react with water, but only
at elevated temperatures. Others will not react with pure water but will
undergo redox processes in the presence of acid. Finally, some of the
least active metals are inert even when submerged in very acidic
solutions.

+--------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| Metal                    | Symbol                   | Reactivity               |
+==========================+==========================+==========================+
| Lithium                  | Li K                     | *Reacts with water,      |
|                          |                          | steam, and acids to      |
| Potassium                | Sr                       | produce H ~2~ and metal  |
|                          |                          | hydroxides*              |
| Strontium                | Ca                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Calcium                  | Na                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Sodium                   |                          |                          |
+--------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| Magnesium Aluminum       | Mg                       | *Reacts with steam and   |
|                          |                          | acids to produce H ~2~   |
| Zinc                     | Al                       | and metal hydroxides*    |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Chromium                 | Zn                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
|                          | Cr                       |                          |
+--------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| Iron                     | Fe                       | *Will not react with     |
|                          |                          | water, but reacts with   |
| Cadmium                  | Cd                       | acids to produce H ~2~   |
|                          |                          | and metal salts*         |
| Cobalt                   | Co                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Nickel                   | Ni                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Tin                      | Sn                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Lead                     | Pb                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Hydrogen gas             | H ~2~                    |                          |
+--------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| Antimony                 | Sb                       | *Will not react with     |
|                          |                          | water or acids to form H |
| Arsenic                  | As                       | ~2~ ; forms oxides with  |
|                          |                          | O ~2~*                   |
| Bismuth                  | Bi                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Copper                   | Cu                       |                          |
+--------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| Mercury                  | Hg                       | *Found as a pure element |
|                          |                          | in nature; oxides        |
| Silver                   | Ag                       | decompose with heating*  |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Palladium                | Pd                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Platinum                 | Pt                       |                          |
|                          |                          |                          |
| Gold                     | Au                       |                          |
+--------------------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+

This table summarizes a lot of useful information. For example, cations
of a given metal can be reduced back to their elemental form by any more
active metal (higher in the activity series), but not by less active
metals. For example, we can predict that the following reaction will
occur spontaneously:

<dl id="x-ck12-NTJjM2I0YjNmMTU0ZDliYjhiZjMzNTk3ZWNkMTViMWM.-fx7">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTJjM2I0YjNmMTU0ZDliYjhiZjMzNTk3ZWNkMTViMWM.-lhy">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTJjM2I0YjNmMTU0ZDliYjhiZjMzNTk3ZWNkMTViMWM.-dyb">
<dd>
2 K + Mg ^2+^ → 2 K ^+^ + Mg

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Potassium is more active than magnesium. Potassium has a stronger
driving force causing it to give up its valence electrons than
magnesium, so we are left with K ^+^ cations instead of Mg ^2+^ cations
at the end of the reaction. Similarly, we would predict that the
following reaction would *not* occur spontaneously as written:

<dl id="x-ck12-NzlhZjhlMjc4MWQzOGY5YmI3ODc2YWY1ZmMwMTk2ZGM.-07x">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzlhZjhlMjc4MWQzOGY5YmI3ODc2YWY1ZmMwMTk2ZGM.-qyp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzlhZjhlMjc4MWQzOGY5YmI3ODc2YWY1ZmMwMTk2ZGM.-9b8">
<dd>
Sn + Fe ^2+^ → Sn ^2+^ + Fe

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Iron is more active than tin, so neutral iron could be used to reduce
tin cations, but not the other way around. The activity series
(sometimes referred to as the electromotive series) is a very useful
tool as we explore how to generate electric currents.

## Galvanic Cells {#23.html#x-ck12-R2FsdmFuaWMgQ2VsbHM.-ti5}

One of the many useful applications of electrochemistry is in the
generation of electric current. We saw earlier how electrons can be
transferred from one atom to another in an oxidation-reduction reaction.
If we place a strip of metallic zinc in a solution of copper sulfate, we
will soon see a single-displacement reaction, in which zinc is oxidized
to its corresponding cations, and the copper cations will plate out on
the strip as neutral copper. The electron transfer from the zinc to the
copper is direct, because the metal surface is in direct contact with
the ions in the solution.

Alternatively, we can channel the electron flow from zinc to copper
through a wire by using a voltaic cell. Forcing the electrons to travel
through a wire in order to get from one species to another allows us to
harness that energy and use it to perform mechanical work, something
that is not possible for the situation described above in which the
oxidizing and reducing agents were in direct contact. The first such
cell was developed by Alessandro Volta in 1800. Similar concepts were
explored by Luigi Galvani in the late 1700s, so these cells are often
referred to as **galvanic cells** . A typical cell is illustrated in
**Figure** [below](#23.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjMtMDItR2FsdmFuaWMtQ2VsbA..)
.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-Nzk5YTI3OTY1NGY0ZTRkNTZjZmQwOGVjZWE0YmE0MWY.-vu2"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235427824018.png)

**Figure 23.1**

A galvanic (or voltaic) cell.

</div>

There are two major components to this cell. A solution of Zn(NO ~3~ )
~2~ (on the left) has a zinc strip immersed in it. On the right, we see
a copper strip in a solution of Cu(NO ~3~ ) ~2~ . A porous barrier
separates the two solutions. The solutions are not in direct contact
with one another, but ions can flow freely through the barrier. The two
metal strips are connected by a wire that allows electrons to move from
one strip to the other.

Referring to our activity series, we see that Zn is more active than Cu.
As a result, Zn will spontaneously give up its electrons to reduce
copper cations, but Cu will not spontaneously reduce zinc cations. In
the **Figure**
[above](#23.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjMtMDItR2FsdmFuaWMtQ2VsbA..) , Zn can
undergo a reaction that produces Zn ^2+^ and two electrons. The two
electrons flow through the wire (powering a meter or device if one is
present) towards the copper electrode. Once the electrons reach the
copper sulfate solution, they are used to reduce Cu ^2+^ ions to
metallic copper, which plates out on the copper electrode. When a metal
“plates out”, it is transferred from an aqueous ion in solution to a
neutral metal atom in its solid form.

The porous disk allows for the transfer of anions from the copper side
to the zinc side. During the reaction, more Zn ^2+^ accumulates on the
left side of the cell, and Cu ^2+^ is being depleted from the right side
of the cell. Without the porous disc, this would cause an unstable
buildup of positive charge on the zinc side and negative charge on the
copper side. To relieve this imbalance, anions essentially move through
the porous disk from right to left, balancing the positive charge of the
newly formed Zn ^2+^ ions and moving away from the side with a
decreasing concentration of positively charged Cu ^2+^ ions.

## Batteries {#23.html#x-ck12-QmF0dGVyaWVz-nbk}

Records from ancient Greece mention that Thales of Miletus (a Greek
philosopher, mathematician, and astronomer who lived from 620-546 BC)
rubbed fur with amber and generated a strange phenomenon, which we now
call static electricity. Although the ancient Greeks did not have a good
understanding of what was happening, we now have well-developed theories
about how to generate and use electric currents.

There are many situations where an electric current is needed to make a
device work, but it is inconvenient (or impossible) to plug the device
into a wall circuit. A cell phone or digital watch would not be very
useful if we had to plug the device into a power outlet in order for it
to function.

Batteries provide us with a portable source of electricity that can be
used when a power outlet is not available. The first battery was
developed by Alessandro Volta (1745-1827) in 1800. He constructed a
“voltaic pile” consisting of alternate discs of silver and zinc that
were separated by paper soaked in salt water. According to some sources,
Volta tested the battery by measuring the strength of the electric
current. His “measurement” involved seeing how intense the shock
produced by the battery was on a person (never a good idea).

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-ZDg3Yjg5YzY4NjZlMWQzNmExMDhmZDNjZTU0YWE4MmM.-vxu"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Aldolphe Ganot" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Voltaic_pile_battery.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235428095913.png)

**Figure 23.2**

A drawing of Alessandro Volta's voltaic pile, the first electric
battery. It was built of many individual cells, each consisting of a
disk of copper or silver and a disk of zinc separated by a cloth soaked
in acid or brine. A 23-cell pile like this would have produced around 36
volts.

</div>

A modern **battery** employs oxidation-reduction reactions to generate a
flow of electrons. The material being oxidized will release electrons
that can flow through an electrical circuit and produce work of some
sort. The electrons then flow into the material that is being reduced.
This process will be illustrated through specific examples as we look at
a few common types of batteries that are in use today.

### Lead-Acid Batteries {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVhZC1BY2lkIEJhdHRlcmllcw..-ype}

One common type of battery is the type used to start a car. When the
circuit is open (the poles are not connected), no electrons are flowing.
However, when the circuit is closed by turning the ignition key to “on”,
the poles are connected and electrons can flow from one pole to the
other. This flow of electrons will create a spark in the engine
cylinders that ignites the gasoline. The ignition causes the piston to
move up and down, powering the car.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-YTc3ZmRhOWYxMWFiNzFjZDIzNTQxZmRlNjc4MWQ1YmE.-py3"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235428216283.png)

**Figure 23.3**

Car battery

</div>

A typical car battery involves two poles, one made of lead, and the
other made of lead oxide. Each pole is submerged in sulfuric acid, and
the two compartments (one containing each pole) are separated by a
barrier that is permeable to ions and water. Based on its components,
this type of battery is referred to as a **lead-acid battery** . The
overall reaction that takes place is the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-bj7">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-f4v">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-spx">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Pb+PbO\_2+2H\_2SO\_4 \\to
2PbSO\_4+2H\_2O}](ck12_math_images_dir/2d4e33b016f56ce7048d5605e020f477.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If we were to assign oxidation numbers to each atom, we would see that
the only element changing state is lead. The pure lead (oxidation state
= 0) is oxidized to Pb ^2+^ , and the lead (IV) oxide (oxidation state =
+4) is reduced to Pb ^2+^ . We can therefore write the following two
half-reactions:

<dl id="x-ck12-MzM0NDUzYzVjOTY0MGNmMTM5YTgxOTEyMWFhMGJkY2Q.-skf">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGVmOTM5OGZiM2I0ZTBmYTVmODUyMDI4MjJmOTFhYzc.-qqn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGVmOTM5OGZiM2I0ZTBmYTVmODUyMDI4MjJmOTFhYzc.-sg0">
<dd>
Pb ^0^ → Pb ^2+^ + 2e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWY3ZDY4Y2Y5ZmY1MjFkZTQxOTMzODExZTE1YTBkMWU.-xv6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWY3ZDY4Y2Y5ZmY1MjFkZTQxOTMzODExZTE1YTBkMWU.-ho1">
<dd>
Pb ^4+^ + 2e ^-^ → Pb ^2+^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
By separating the Pb ^0^ from the Pb ^4+^ , we can force the electrons
to flow through a wire in order to complete the redox reaction.
Eventually, both metal poles are converted to PbSO ~4~ , and the battery
can no longer produce a flow of electrons. However, the battery can be
recharged by forcing the reaction to run in the opposite direction by
using an external source of energy (such as the energy given off by the
combustion of gasoline).

The description given above describes the process that occurs in one
cell of a lead-acid battery. Because cars require a battery with a
higher voltage than can be obtained with a single cell, car batteries
generally consist of several cells connected together to produce the
desired voltage output. A typical car battery will generate twelve volts
of electricity.

### Dry Cell Batteries {#23.html#x-ck12-RHJ5IENlbGwgQmF0dGVyaWVz-38l}

The car battery is an example of a “wet cell” battery, because there is
a liquid electrolyte (sulfuric acid) present in the system. These
batteries must operate in an upright position so the liquid material
does not spill out. In contrast, **dry cell batteries** contain a paste
that serves as the positive electrode. The composition and voltage
depends on the specific battery, but typical voltage outputs are in the
1.0-1.5 volt range.

One common material used for the positive electrode is a mixture of
ammonium chloride and manganese dioxide. The half-reaction at this pole
is the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZTM5ZDc2NThjNjE1NTExNTUwZDNmM2VlNTY2ODg3OTQ.-ub5">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTM5ZDc2NThjNjE1NTExNTUwZDNmM2VlNTY2ODg3OTQ.-3yi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTM5ZDc2NThjNjE1NTExNTUwZDNmM2VlNTY2ODg3OTQ.-x2m">
<dd>
2 NH ~4~ ^+^ + 2 MnO ~2~ + 2e ^-^ → Mn ~2~ O ~3~ + 2 NH ~3~ + H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Simplifying this to just the atom being oxidized, we get the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-OTkwMmMwMjA2ZWNlNzZjOGJhYTIxYWM3ZmZhNWNlMTY.-vtq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTkwMmMwMjA2ZWNlNzZjOGJhYTIxYWM3ZmZhNWNlMTY.-u61">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTkwMmMwMjA2ZWNlNzZjOGJhYTIxYWM3ZmZhNWNlMTY.-tda">
<dd>
Mn ^4+^ + e ^-^ → Mn ^3+^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The electrons for this half-reaction are provided by oxidation of
metallic zinc:

<dl id="x-ck12-OWE0MmRkZWIwZjBhYTE5YTAxZGU1N2U2MDExZGU2NGU.-eil">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWE0MmRkZWIwZjBhYTE5YTAxZGU1N2U2MDExZGU2NGU.-bgt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWE0MmRkZWIwZjBhYTE5YTAxZGU1N2U2MDExZGU2NGU.-szi">
<dd>
Zn → Zn ^+2^ + 2e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Also included in this setup are ZnCl ~2~ (part of the paste) and an
inert carbon rod that acts as a conductor. Over time, the zinc container
will be partially consumed and weakened by the oxidation half-reaction.
These batteries cannot be recharged. Running the reaction in reverse
would regenerate solid zinc, but not in a form that would have the same
structural properties as the original container.

“Alkaline” batteries use either NaOH or KOH in place of the ammonium
chloride. The half-reactions in an alkaline battery are shown below:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZDdjY2E3ZDA0NWI3OGE5M2Q2YjhmZmJiNmY5MDQ4ZjA.-yk2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWVhNWE3ODY3MWEzNjA0ZDFkZWNlNWNlNGRkNGViMzU.-4ud">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWVhNWE3ODY3MWEzNjA0ZDFkZWNlNWNlNGRkNGViMzU.-1yz">
<dd>
Zn + 2 OH ^-^ → ZnO + H ~2~ O + 2e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2UzOThkNWFlZjEyMDBjNzFiNDIxZTVkNmEzNDExNGI.-gih">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-M2UzOThkNWFlZjEyMDBjNzFiNDIxZTVkNmEzNDExNGI.-vpt">
<dd>
2 MnO ~2~ + 2e ^-^ + H ~2~ O → Mn ~2~ O ~3~ + 2 OH ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This type of battery lasts longer than the ammonium chloride version,
because zinc corrodes more slowly in a basic medium than it does in an
acidic medium.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-YWZmNzBiZjg3MTEwYTEyZTIyZDgyMWUwYTNmOWE4Yjk.-8xe"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Tympanus/De.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zinc-carbon-english.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235428356273.png)

**Figure 23.4**

Alkaline battery.

</div>

**Figure**
[above](#23.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjMtMDUtQWxrYWxpbmUtQmF0dGVyeQ..)
illustrates a typical setup for a dry cell battery. The zinc container
provides the source of electrons, and the manganese-containing paste
provides a place for those electrons to be used. Because there are
insulating layers in between these two components, very little electron
flow occurs when the battery is not hooked up to anything. However, a
low resistance pathway is provided if the two terminals are connected
with a wire. Starting at the zinc container, electrons can flow freely
through the negative terminal, the wire, the positive terminal, and the
conductive carbon rod, finally reaching the electron-accepting paste, in
which manganese is reduced. If the wire runs through a light or
mechanical device, the movement of the electrons through the wire will
provide the power necessary to operate the device.

Rechargeable dry cell batteries are used in a wide variety of
applications, from small devices like digital cameras and cell phones to
cars, including both hybrids that run on a combination of gas and
electricity and all-electric vehicles that must be recharged after each
short trip. These batteries are generally of the nickel-metal hydride
(NiMH) type.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-Mjk2ZmQzZDk3ZTcyMTZmY2Y4MTc5ZGVmNDQwNGQzOGU.-z5h"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Tympanus/De.Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Swissroll-battery-english.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235428565072.png)

**Figure 23.5**

Rechargeable battery.

</div>

In a nickel-metal hydride battery, the negative electrode is composed of
nickel (II) hydroxide and some other alkaline electrolyte, such as KOH.
The nickel serves as the source of electrons via the following
half-reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-MzcxYjE5YjdiZGJiMTlmYmYwMzA0ODE1N2IyZDZlMGE.-hek">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MzcxYjE5YjdiZGJiMTlmYmYwMzA0ODE1N2IyZDZlMGE.-lje">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MzcxYjE5YjdiZGJiMTlmYmYwMzA0ODE1N2IyZDZlMGE.-5iv">
<dd>
Ni(OH) ~2~ + OH ^-^ → NiO(OH) + H ~2~ O + e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Looking only at the element that changes oxidation state (the nickel),
we could also write the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-YjVlZTFlN2M2YzQyZDFjNjAwMDZkOTNmOGViOTg3NTE.-a2r">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjVlZTFlN2M2YzQyZDFjNjAwMDZkOTNmOGViOTg3NTE.-zvj">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjVlZTFlN2M2YzQyZDFjNjAwMDZkOTNmOGViOTg3NTE.-0tq">
<dd>
Ni ^2+^ → Ni ^3+^ + e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The positive electrode is a complex mixture of neutral metals, some of
which are generally rare earth metals (e.g., lanthanum, cerium, and
neodymium) and others that are more plentiful (e.g., nickel, cobalt,
manganese, and aluminum). The half-reaction at this electrode has the
following general form:

<dl id="x-ck12-YzUxMWE4ZTJiNDg2MzY1MTUxZDczMGQ5MzgwMzE2NWE.-5zq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YzUxMWE4ZTJiNDg2MzY1MTUxZDczMGQ5MzgwMzE2NWE.-qad">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YzUxMWE4ZTJiNDg2MzY1MTUxZDczMGQ5MzgwMzE2NWE.-exh">
<dd>
H ~2~ O + M + e ^-^ → OH ^-^ + MH

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where M is a neutral metal (oxidation number = 0), and MH is a metal
hydride. Note that in metal hydrides, hydrogen has an oxidation number
of -1, so the metal exists as a cation. Both half-reactions are readily
reversible, allowing the battery to be recharged.

### Fuel Cells {#23.html#x-ck12-RnVlbCBDZWxscw..-pkt}

There are a wide variety of different **fuel cells** available. Many are
large devices that would be most suitable for stationary generators. The
type we will consider in this section is portable and can be used to
power a car or similar vehicle. This cell is referred to as a polymer
exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC).

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-OThlOTFiYzRlOWVkYjQ4MDNlYWE3MTQ3YjkxYWRhZjk.-o4w"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:HandigeHarry/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fuel_cell_EN.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235428710819.png)

**Figure 23.6**

Typical hydrogen fuel cell.

</div>

The basic operation of this type of fuel cell involves an initial
reaction of hydrogen gas with the platinum catalyst (purple area), which
facilitates the following half-reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-YjYyYjM1NzAxODkyODliNDUzYTZhMzBjMzkwMjQyYWI.-kws">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjYyYjM1NzAxODkyODliNDUzYTZhMzBjMzkwMjQyYWI.-1cd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjYyYjM1NzAxODkyODliNDUzYTZhMzBjMzkwMjQyYWI.-leg">
<dd>
H ~2~ → 2 H ^+^ + 2 e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The electrons are passed through the circuit, providing energy to the
system, while the hydrogen ions move across the proton exchange membrane
(the red area), which is permeable only to cations. At the other
electrode, oxygen from the air reacts with electrons that have gone
through the external circuit and the protons that pass through the red
membrane area according to the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZjJhYzlhMjgzODI3MzFmYzc4MDFiOWQ2YjI4ZmMzODk.-qum">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjJhYzlhMjgzODI3MzFmYzc4MDFiOWQ2YjI4ZmMzODk.-xmu">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZjJhYzlhMjgzODI3MzFmYzc4MDFiOWQ2YjI4ZmMzODk.-2ct">
<dd>
O ~2~ + 4 H ^+^ + 4 e ^-^ → 2 H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
One major advantage of a hydrogen fuel cell is that the only waste
product is water (and leftover nitrogen from the air, which is not
involved in any chemical reactions). However, a major drawback is the
need for pure hydrogen, which is flammable and difficult to store. A
variety of techniques are being explored in an attempt to solve this
storage problem.

## Lesson Summary {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-rug}

-   The activity series (or electromotive series) ranks metals in terms
    of their ability to be oxidized.
-   Batteries are based on galvanic (voltaic) cells, which use
    oxidation-reduction reactions to generate a flow of electrons that
    can be employed for useful work.
-   The lead-acid battery in a car is a “wet cell” battery in which
    there is a net transfer of electrons from Pb to PbO ~2~ .
-   “Dry cell” batteries use a paste instead of a liquid solution. A
    common type of dry cell battery uses zinc as a reducing agent and a
    manganese compound as an oxidizing agent.
-   One type of rechargeable battery uses water as the electron
    acceptor, resulting in the formation of metal hydrides. These can
    easily be converted back to the original metal by running the
    reaction in the reverse direction using an external energy source.
-   A common type of fuel cell uses the platinum catalyzed reaction
    between hydrogen and oxygen gases to generate power.

## Lesson Review Questions {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-jmh}

1.  What does the metal reactivity series indicate about the ability of
    cations of a given metal to be reduced back to their elemental form?
2.  Sketch a basic galvanic cell, indicating the location of the anode,
    cathode, salt bridge, and the direction of electron flow.
3.  What causes the electrons to flow through a wire in a lead-acid
    battery?
4.  Write half-reactions for a dry cell battery composed of nickel(II)
    oxide and cadmium.
5.  In a dry cell battery that uses oxidation-reduction reactions
    involving silver and zinc, which metal will be spontaneously
    oxidized by cations of the other metal?
6.  Explain how a car battery works.
7.  Write the oxidation and reduction half-reactions for the lithium
    battery shown in the **Figure**
    [below](#23.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjMtMDgtTGl0aGl1bS1CYXR0ZXJ5) , and
    explain how it generates electron flow.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-YzdkY2Y3OGYyOTYyNDc2ZWZkZTljNjgyODNiMzA0OGE.-vjo"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Lukas A, CZE" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CR2032_disassembled.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429116786.jpeg)

**Figure 23.7**

Disassembled CR2032 lithium battery. From the left (the negative
terminal) - Cup from the inner side with a layer of lithium (which
oxidizes when exposed to air), separator (porous material), layer of
manganese dioxide, metal grid (current collector), metal casing (damaged
while opening the cell). On the bottom is plastic sealing ring.

</div>

8.  What characteristic of rechargeable batteries (such as nickel-metal
    hydride batteries) allows the batteries to recharge?
9.  Write the half-reactions that would occur when each neutral element
    below is placed in an aqueous solution of the following compound. If
    no reaction would occur, indicate why.
    1.  Ca + H ~2~ O
    2.  Bi + HCl
    3.  Mg + NiO
    4.  Pb + Al(NO ~3~ ) ~3~
    5.  Cr + CuSO ~4~

10. What is an advantage of using hydrogen fuel cells to generate power?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#23.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-su2}

-   Activity series:
    [http://antoine.frostburg.edu/chem/senese/101/redox/faq/activity-series.shtml](activity-series.shtml)
-   Car battery tutorial:
    [http://www.batterystuff.com/kb/articles/battery-articles/battery-basics.html](battery-basics.html)
-   Fuel cell basics:
    [http://americanhistory.si.edu/fuelcells/basics.htm](basics.htm)

## Points to Consider {#23.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-4rd}

-   We have talked about the components necessary to create an
    electrical current, but we have not talked about the flow of
    electrons in a quantitative manner. In the next lesson, we will
    learn how to determine the amount of electricity generated by an
    electrochemical cell.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686172] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686173] -->

# Cell Potential {#23.html#x-ck12-Q2VsbCBQb3RlbnRpYWw.}

## Lesson Objectives {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-rwt}

-   Diagram and explain the operation of a standard hydrogen cell.
-   Explain how to determine standard reduction potentials.
-   Use standard reduction potentials to calculate the total potential
    of a given electrochemical cell.
-   Use the Nernst equation to calculate reduction potentials under
    non-standard conditions.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-haj}

-   **electrical potential** : A measurement of the ability of a voltaic
    cell to produce an electric current; typically measured in
    volts (V).
-   **standard reduction potential** : A measurement of the tendency of
    a given half-reaction to occur as a reduction in an
    electrochemical cell.
-   **cell potential** : The difference in standard reduction potentials
    between the two half-cells in an electrochemical cell.
-   **standard cell potential** : The potential of an electrochemical
    cell when the temperature is 25°C, all aqueous components are
    present at a concentration of 1 M, and all gases are at the standard
    pressure of 1 atm.
-   **standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)** : A reference half-cell that
    can be used with another electrode (half-cell) to determine its
    standard reduction potential.
-   **anode** : The cell in which the oxidation takes place.
-   **cathode** : The cell in which the reduction takes place.

## Check Your Understanding {#23.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-jzr}

-   How do you use the activity series to determine whether a given
    redox reaction will occur spontaneously?

## Introduction {#23.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-qzu}

When designing electrochemical cells such as batteries, scientists and
engineers must be able to calculate electrical potentials in order to
create powerful and sensible energy sources. By comparing and combining
reduction reactions, different cell potentials can be obtained and
utilized to conduct an effective electric current. In this lesson you
will learn how to predict whether or not a redox reaction will occur
spontaneously based on the electrical potentials of various cells.

## Reduction Potential {#23.html#x-ck12-UmVkdWN0aW9uIFBvdGVudGlhbA.._1-jl9}

The activity series that was presented in the previous lesson allows us
to predict the relative reactivities of different materials when used in
oxidation-reduction processes. We also saw that appropriate combinations
of half-reactions can be used to generate an electric current. However,
we have not yet looked at the energy changes associated with any of
these redox reactions. **Electrical potential** is a measurement of the
ability of a voltaic cell to produce an electric current. It is
typically measured in volts (V). Like energy, electrical potential is a
relative term; it can only be measured by comparison with something
else. The voltage that is produced by a given voltaic cell is the
difference in electrical potential between the two half-cells, but it is
not possible to measure the electrical potential of an isolated
half-cell. For example, if only a zinc half-cell were constructed, no
complete redox reaction can occur, so no electrical potential can be
measured. It is only when another half-cell is combined with the zinc
half-cell that an electrical potential difference, or voltage, can be
measured.

The electrical potential of a cell results from a competition for
electrons between two different chemical species. The "winner" of this
battle is reduced (gains electrons), while the "loser" is oxidized
(loses electrons). A **standard reduction potential** measures the
tendency of a given half-reaction to occur as a reduction in an
electrochemical cell. In a given voltaic cell, the half-cell that has
the greater reduction potential is the one in which reduction will
occur. In the half-cell with the lower reduction potential, the reverse
process (oxidation) will occur. The **cell potential** (E ~cell~ ) is
the difference in standard reduction potential between the two
half-cells in an electrochemical cell.

## Standard Cell Potentials {#23.html#x-ck12-U3RhbmRhcmQgQ2VsbCBQb3RlbnRpYWxz_1-8gd}

The **standard cell potential** (E° ~cell~ ) is the potential of an
electrochemical cell when the temperature is 25°C, all aqueous
components are present at a concentration of 1 M, and all gases are at
the standard pressure of 1 atm. The standard cell potential can be
calculated by finding the difference between the standard reduction
potentials of the two half-cells.

<dl id="x-ck12-psq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-glb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-6x7">
<dd>
![\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{cell}}=\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{red}}-\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{oxid}}](ck12_math_images_dir/e90dad4118ee6904b91a2d21d48e3f45.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Since the reduction potentials for half-cells cannot be measured
independently, it is necessary to establish a standard to serve as a
reference. This reference is given a standard reduction potential of 0
volts by definition. Every other half-cell can then be compared to this
standard electrode in order to determine the reduction potential for any
half-cell. The **standard hydrogen electrode** (SHE) is a reference
half-cell that can be used with another electrode (half-cell) to
determine its standard reduction potential. A standard hydrogen
electrode is shown in **Figure**
[below](#23.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMjMtMDYtSHlkcm9nZW4tRWxlY3Ryb2Rl) .

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-MzAyYzMwY2IwMThhOTVkYThjOTgyYThlYzhjNWY2ZTA.-tfh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429229247.png)

**Figure 23.8**

The standard hydrogen electrode is an arbitrary reference cell that is
assigned a standard reduction potential of 0.00 V.

</div>

The electrode itself is made of platinum, which serves as an inert
surface upon which the oxidation or reduction reaction takes place. The
electrode is then placed in contact with both hydrogen gas (at a
pressure of 1 atm) and an acidic solution in which the concentration of
H ^+^ is 1.0 M. Written as a reduction, the following half-reaction
takes place in a SHE:

<dl id="x-ck12-nmw">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-b8q">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-yci">
<dd>
![2\\text{H}\^+(aq) + 2\\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow \\text{H}\_2(g)
\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\; \\text{E}\^\\circ = 0.00 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/3ee572832b7a02e212a9ede4d1ec69fc.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Depending on the relative electrical potential of other half-cell that
the SHE is combined with, the hydrogen ions may be reduced or the
hydrogen gas may be oxidized. In general, reversing a reaction will also
reverse the sign of the corresponding electrical potential. However,
reversing the above reaction has no effect on the standard potential,
because the opposite of zero is still zero.

<dl id="x-ck12-z38">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gql">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-vfx">
<dd>
![\\text{H}\_2(g) \\rightarrow 2\\text{H}\^+(aq) + 2\\text{e}\^-
\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\;\\; \\text{E}\^\\circ = 0.00 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/dcdb5a57501098a6e036c9418828401e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
### Determining Standard Reduction Potentials {#23.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZXJtaW5pbmcgU3RhbmRhcmQgUmVkdWN0aW9uIFBvdGVudGlhbHM._1-vwt}

When a standard hydrogen half-cell is connected to a standard copper
half-cell and connected to a voltmeter ( **Figure**
[below](#23.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMjMtMDctU3RhbmRhcmQtUG90ZW50aWFscw..)
(A)), the reading is 0.34 V.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-OTkzYmY3N2ZkYWFlZTIzODYyNDliZjg4MTg5ZGMxYjY.-n1m"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429356197.png)

**Figure 23.9**

\(A) The standard hydrogen half-cell is paired with a Cu/Cu ^2+^
half-cell. H ~2~ is oxidized, while Cu ^2+^ is reduced. (B) The standard
hydrogen half-cell is paired with a Zn/Zn ^2+^ half-cell. Zn is
oxidized, while H ^+^ is reduced.

</div>

Observation of the cell shows that the copper(II) ion is reduced to
copper metal, while the hydrogen gas is oxidized to hydrogen ions. This
is shown below along with the overall reaction taking place in the cell.

![&\\text{Oxidation:} && \\text{H}\_2(g) \\rightarrow 2\\text{H}\^+(aq)
+ 2\\text{e}\^- \\\\\\&\\text{Reduction:} && \\text{Cu}\^{2+} +
2\\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow \\text{Cu}(s) \\\\\\\\hline&\\text{Overall:}
&& \\text{H}\_2(g) + \\text{Cu}\^{2+}(aq) \\rightarrow 2\\text{H}\^+(aq)
+
\\text{Cu}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/ab8c5b5274b3aa331384adb0d1ea76fc.png)

In this particular galvanic cell, the SHE is the **anode** (where
oxidation takes place), and the copper half-cell is the **cathode**
(where reduction takes place). Electrons flow from the SHE to the copper
electrode. The standard cell potential (
![\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{cell}}](ck12_math_images_dir/49421a259f600e82ac966f6d17cbf46f.png)
) is the measured value of 0.34 V, while the potential of the SHE is
defined to be zero. This allows us to determine the reduction potential
of the copper half-cell.

![& \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{cell}} = \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{red}}
- \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{oxid}} \\\\\\& 0.34 \\ \\text{V} =
\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{Cu}} - 0.00 \\ \\text{V} \\\\\\&
\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{Cu}} = 0.34 \\ \\text{V} - 0.00 \\ \\text{V}
= +0.34 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/3baaf06283745e04b7d8cb944fe8d297.png)

The standard reduction potential for the Cu ^2+^ |Cu half-cell is thus
equal to +0.34 V. In a similar way, the reduction potential for any
half-cell can be determined by connecting it to a SHE and measuring the
voltage. Notice the line notation used for the copper half-cell, Cu ^2+^
|Cu, which indicates the phase boundary between the aqueous copper
cations and the neutral copper metal atoms. This line notation is used
as a standard to distinguish between the components of the electric
cell.

When a standard hydrogen half-cell is connected to a standard zinc
half-cell ( **Figure**
[above](#23.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMjMtMDctU3RhbmRhcmQtUG90ZW50aWFscw..)
(B)), the measured voltage is 0.76 V. However, it is observed that the
zinc electrode is oxidized to zinc ions while the hydrogen ion is
reduced to hydrogen gas.

![& \\text{Oxidation:} && \\text{Zn}(s) \\rightarrow
\\text{Zn}\^{2+}(aq) + 2\\text{e}\^- \\\\\\& \\text{Reduction:} &&
2\\text{H}\^+(aq) + 2\\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow \\text{H}\_2(g)
\\\\\\\\hline& \\text{Overall:} && \\text{Zn}(s) + 2\\text{H}\^+(aq)
\\rightarrow \\text{Zn}\^{2+}(aq) +
\\text{H}\_2(g)](ck12_math_images_dir/314fb9db4c140964023fa887f2f58baf.png)

The SHE is now the cathode, while the zinc electrode is the anode. Now
it is the E° for the oxidation half-cell that is the unknown in the
standard cell potential equation.

![&\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{cell}} = \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{red}}
- \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{oxid}} \\\\\\&0.76 \\ \\text{V} = 0.00 \\
\\text{V} - \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{Zn}}
\\\\\\&\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{Zn}} = 0.00 \\ \\text{V} - 0.76 \\
\\text{V} = -0.76 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/e576d42a285f83b1aa79745f5d3d98d6.png)

The standard reduction potential for the Zn ^2+^ /Zn half-cell is equal
to −0.76 V. A negative standard reduction potential for a particular
species means that is easier to reduce H ^+^ than to reduce that
species. A positive standard reduction potential for a species means
that it reduces more easily than H ^+^ . The **Table**
[below](#23.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6U3RhbmRhcmRfUmVkdWN0aW9uX1BvdGVudGlhbHM.)
lists many reduction potentials under standard conditions. From top to
bottom, they are listed in decreasing order of their tendency to occur
in the forward direction, as a reduction. Fluorine gas is the most
easily reduced, while lithium ions are the most difficult to reduce.
Note that this table is the exact opposite of the activity series.
Lithium ions are very difficult to reduce, which means that lithium
metal is very easy to oxidize.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6U3RhbmRhcmRfUmVkdWN0aW9uX1BvdGVudGlhbHM.">

[![](images/table.png)](table_23-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

When using these values, keep the following points in mind:

1.  *E* ° values apply to the reaction as written in the
    left-to-right direction. If the reaction is reversed, the sign
    changes, but the value stays the same.
2.  The more positive *E* ° is, the greater the tendency for the
    material to be to reduced.
3.  Under standard-state conditions, any species on the left side of a
    half-cell reaction will spontaneously react with any species on the
    right side of a half-cell reaction that is ranked below it.
4.  Multiplying an entire half-reaction by a constant does *not* change
    the associated reduction potential. This is different than the rules
    for manipulating ΔH ~rxn~ values.

## Calculating Standard Cell Potentials {#23.html#x-ck12-Q2FsY3VsYXRpbmcgU3RhbmRhcmQgQ2VsbCBQb3RlbnRpYWxz_1-se7}

In order to function, any electrochemical cell must consist of two
half-cells. **Table**
[above](#23.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6U3RhbmRhcmRfUmVkdWN0aW9uX1BvdGVudGlhbHM.)
can be used to determine the reactions that will occur and the standard
cell potential for any combination of two half-cells without actually
constructing the cell. The half-cell with the higher reduction potential
according to the table will undergo reduction, while the half-cell with
the lower reduction potential will undergo oxidation. If those
specifications are followed, the overall cell potential will be a
positive value. The cell potential must be positive in order for the
redox reaction in the cell to be spontaneous. If a negative cell
potential were calculated, the reaction would not be spontaneous.
However, that reaction would be spontaneous in the reverse direction.

**Example 23.1**

Calculate the standard cell potential of a voltaic cell that uses the
Ag|Ag ^+^ and Sn|Sn ^2+^ half-cell reactions. Write the balanced
equation for the overall cell reaction that occurs. Identify the anode
and the cathode.

*Answer:*

The silver half-cell has a reduction potential of +0.80 V, whereas the
tin half-cell has a reduction potential of -0.14 V. Reduction will
happen in the silver half-cell, because its standard reduction potential
is more positive. The tin half-cell will undergo oxidation.

![& \\text{Oxidation (anode):} && \\text{Sn}(s)\\rightarrow
\\text{Sn}\^{2+}(aq) + 2\\text{e}\^- \\\\\\& \\text{Reduction
(cathode):} && \\text{Ag}\^+(aq) + \\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow
\\text{Ag}(s)](ck12_math_images_dir/2cbde918e46033cbcc1bf5fe7a5b2896.png)

Before adding the two reactions together, the number of electrons lost
in the oxidation must equal the number of electrons gained in the
reduction. The silver half-cell reaction must be multiplied by two.
Then, adding in the tin half-reaction, we get the full redox process:

<dl id="x-ck12-y1v">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-pqt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-z7r">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Sn(s) + 2Ag\^+(aq) \\to Sn\^{2+}(aq) +
2Ag(s)}](ck12_math_images_dir/8e494fc3ad29e449d495559b0251ff7a.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The overall cell potential can be calculated as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-v6h">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-4bl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-lv0">
<dd>
![\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{cell}} = \\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{red}} -
\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{oxid}}](ck12_math_images_dir/caeaf78c18734fb6d190c60179fc47df.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-yhi">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-8wr">
<dd>
![\\text{E}\^\\circ\_{\\text{cell}} = +0.80 \\ \\text{V} - (-0.14 \\
\\text{V}) = +0.94 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/3aa6ae7124913db0955c323278b5a5e4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The standard cell potential is positive, so the reaction is spontaneous
as written. Tin is oxidized at the anode, while Ag ^+^ is reduced at the
cathode. Note that the voltage for the silver ion reduction is not
doubled even though the reduction half-reaction had to be doubled to
balance the overall redox equation.

## The Nernst Equation {#23.html#x-ck12-VGhlIE5lcm5zdCBFcXVhdGlvbg.._1-gwl}

Up to this point, our discussion of cell potentials has focused on the
standard states. However, in real life we will rarely be using standard
state conditions, so we need a way to work with more practical
situations. For conditions that are not standard-state, we use the
Nernst equation, named after the German chemist Walther Nernst (winner
of the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry).

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-NzNlNTkwZTViNmRmYmQwNjczNzNjYzRkMWQ2NGNiMTY.-tka"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Walther_Nernst_%28Nobel%29.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429481370.png)

**Figure 23.10**

Walther Nernst.

</div>

The Nernst equation has the following form:

<dl id="x-ck12-er2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-gi6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hol">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=E\^\\circ-\\frac{RT}{nF} \\ ln \\
Q}](ck12_math_images_dir/6b530eccaf217373d7eca119f07d25b1.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where E is the reaction potential under the actual conditions, E° is the
reaction potential under standard conditions, R is the universal gas
constant (8.314 J/K•mol), T is the temperature (in Kelvin), n is the
number of moles of electrons transferred in the redox reaction, F is a
value known as the Faraday constant (96,485 C/mol), and Q is the
reaction quotient. Recall that the reaction quotient takes the same form
as the equilibrium constant expression, except that it is true even when
the reaction is not at equilibrium. For example, the reaction quotient
for the following generic reaction is given below:

<dl id="x-ck12-drv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ud0">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-m98">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{aA + bB \\to cC +
dD}](ck12_math_images_dir/b4d868c6252e21a916cb873e088f401e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-aco">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-97n">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Q=\\frac{\[C\]\^c\[D\]\^d}{\[A\]\^a\[B\]\^b}}](ck12_math_images_dir/b2871180f3e124caad0b7ab9157ae483.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If the reaction is run at the standard temperature of 25°C, and it is
just the concentrations that are non-standard, the Nernst equation
simplifies as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-pkt">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-juq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-nv0">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=E\^\\circ-\\frac{0.02569 \\ volts}{n} \\ ln \\
Q}](ck12_math_images_dir/3a2483732c289797bae4ec601e9f4740.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Or, if you prefer base-10 logarithms:

<dl id="x-ck12-eof">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-grd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qk8">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=E\^\\circ-\\frac{0.05619 \\ volts}{n} \\ log \\
Q}](ck12_math_images_dir/922963a0b90295b4a15e96e26bd3dbe8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Let's look at an example problem to see how this equation is used.

**Example Problem 23.2**

Calculate the cell potential at 25°C for the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-MGEyMmNjMDIxNDg3ODM4NTE4Mzc5MzhjYjAyNDcyNjA.-k6c">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGEyMmNjMDIxNDg3ODM4NTE4Mzc5MzhjYjAyNDcyNjA.-owc">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MGEyMmNjMDIxNDg3ODM4NTE4Mzc5MzhjYjAyNDcyNjA.-kr3">
<dd>
Cu(s) + 2Fe ^3+^ (aq) → Cu ^2+^ (aq) + 2Fe ^2+^ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The ions are present in the following concentrations: 1.0 x 10 ^-4^ M Fe
^3+^ , 0.25 M Cu ^2+^ , and 0.20 M Fe ^2+^ .

*Answer:*

The Nernst equation has the following form at 25°C:

<dl id="x-ck12-cmg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fvk">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-up0">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=E\^\\circ-\\frac{0.05619 \\ volts}{n} \\ log \\
Q}](ck12_math_images_dir/922963a0b90295b4a15e96e26bd3dbe8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In order to find the cell potential (E), we need to find values for E°,
n, and Q. Let's start by splitting this reaction into half-reactions.
Because there are only two different metals, we can easily see that the
unbalanced half-reactions will have the following forms:

<dl id="x-ck12-MTI5OTgwZWEzOTRhMDJkYjk3ZjJmMGNmNDM1ZjNjOTU.-0se">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWMzNWI3NTViNzYzYjY0ZWYwOWM2NGIwZmI5NDUwYmU.-dap">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OWMzNWI3NTViNzYzYjY0ZWYwOWM2NGIwZmI5NDUwYmU.-jap">
<dd>
Cu(s) → Cu ^2+^ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YThlN2FhNzE3MzhkYWUyMmYyODdmOTU5ZjZlMGNhYzA.-9mv">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YThlN2FhNzE3MzhkYWUyMmYyODdmOTU5ZjZlMGNhYzA.-ut0">
<dd>
2Fe ^3+^ (aq) → 2Fe ^2+^ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Then, balance each of these half-reactions by adding electrons to the
appropriate side (enough to balance the charge on each side of the
equation):

<dl id="x-ck12-Njc0MWExMDMwZjBiMmQwMjliMjQyYzg1MmI2YTExZTU.-ivr">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTQzMTcwOWEzYjUzNTE5ZTNmZmU0MmI1ZTAzMzQ0ZTk.-3t1">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZTQzMTcwOWEzYjUzNTE5ZTNmZmU0MmI1ZTAzMzQ0ZTk.-kef">
<dd>
Cu(s) → Cu ^2+^ (aq) + 2e ^-^

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWE0YWU2N2U2ZjM5YWZjNTFmMjdiM2I0NGZiYjkyNTE.-5ng">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ZWE0YWU2N2U2ZjM5YWZjNTFmMjdiM2I0NGZiYjkyNTE.-hr4">
<dd>
2Fe ^3+^ (aq) + 2e ^-^ → 2Fe ^2+^ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
This gives us two pieces of information. First, we know that the value
of n in the Nernst equation is equal to 2 (the coefficient of the
electrons in the balanced half-reactions above). Second, we know that
copper is being oxidized and iron is being reduced. Now, look at the
table of standard reduction potentials to find the appropriate values.
What we will find are values for the following two half-reactions:

<dl id="x-ck12-YThiOGZhNjU0Y2VhMmE3MDhlYmM0MjM3ZGRjMGU4YzE.-aij">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWFkZDAxODEwYzcwYTlhZjQyZGUxNzI2M2YyNWQ2OTU.-yfs">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NWFkZDAxODEwYzcwYTlhZjQyZGUxNzI2M2YyNWQ2OTU.-tfu">
<dd>
Cu ^2+^ (aq) + 2e ^-^ → Cu(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjI4NzRhYzY5YmJhOTQyNDA2OWRkMmZjMjEyMDYwMzg.-5eh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjI4NzRhYzY5YmJhOTQyNDA2OWRkMmZjMjEyMDYwMzg.-gey">
<dd>
Fe ^3+^ (aq) + e ^-^ → Fe ^2+^ (aq)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The reduction of Cu ^2+^ (aq) to Cu(s) has a standard potential of +0.34
V, and the reduction of Fe ^3+^ (aq) to Fe ^2+^ (aq) has a standard
potential of +0.77 V. To find E° for this complete cell, we subtract the
reduction potential of the species being oxidized from the reduction
potential of the ion actually being reduced:

<dl id="x-ck12-ZDQ4ZGRlNjY1ZDFmZjdjZThjYmNkNzhiOGVmMzg5NGM.-9t6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTI3YzNhOGZkMTI1OTM4OTBhMDg0NzgzMGU1OTRiOWI.-ewp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTI3YzNhOGZkMTI1OTM4OTBhMDg0NzgzMGU1OTRiOWI.-hd8">
<dd>
E° ~cell~ = E° ~red~ - E° ~oxid~

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YTc2ZmYwZTI2OThkM2Y3MmQzYjQ3NjAyOWRjMGRkMmQ.-pwl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YTc2ZmYwZTI2OThkM2Y3MmQzYjQ3NjAyOWRjMGRkMmQ.-yks">
<dd>
E° ~cell~ = +0.77 - +0.34

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODkxNDUzZWM5ODMxZGVjMGZkNzUwZmRmZTU2NDk4YWQ.-djh">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ODkxNDUzZWM5ODMxZGVjMGZkNzUwZmRmZTU2NDk4YWQ.-ame">
<dd>
E° ~cell~ = +0.43

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Note: We can also think of this as reversing the sign of the oxidation
half-reaction (from +0.34 to -0.34) and then adding the two values
together ((+0.77) + (-0.34) = +0.43). However, do not get mixed up and
reverse the sign twice!

Next, we can determine Q, which has the following form for this
reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-cs6">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-cph">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-8qv">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Q=\\frac{\[Cu\^{2+}\]\[Fe\^{2+}\]\^2}{\[Fe\^{3+}\]\^2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/f2257e81a6e2c90991aaa18344ae21f3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zxq">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-py8">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Q=\\frac{\[0.25\]\[0.20\]\^2}{\[1.0 \\times
10\^{-4}\]\^2}}](ck12_math_images_dir/4d581b40006fcff5788504152df3b2ae.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-kvo">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2ib">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{Q=1.0 \\times
10\^6}](ck12_math_images_dir/b08f9eedb0a28d17e537ec62068ff5e7.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Finally, plug all of these values into the Nernst equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-dkb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-yek">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ctk">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=E\^\\circ-\\frac{0.05619 \\ volts}{n} \\ log \\
Q}](ck12_math_images_dir/922963a0b90295b4a15e96e26bd3dbe8.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-smg">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uil">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=0.43 \\ V-\\frac{0.05619 \\ V}{2} \\ log(1.0 \\times
10\^6)}](ck12_math_images_dir/f09f82fd43f2afb3a5d08258b972b171.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qpd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-s3q">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=0.43 \\ V-0.17 \\
V}](ck12_math_images_dir/a53b10b1ab8f977768fd4a8e3e25806b.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-4ny">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-zuo">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{E=0.26 \\
V}](ck12_math_images_dir/817a70f6b20b5e61bb6efbce9d685224.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Under the given conditions, this electrochemical cell has a potential of
+0.26 V.

**Practice Problem 23.1**

Calculate the cell potential at 25°C for the following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-NGVkMGJmYzJhNGY2NzRjM2YyYWU5YzIzNzg2NGM3ODc.-hql">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGVkMGJmYzJhNGY2NzRjM2YyYWU5YzIzNzg2NGM3ODc.-ps7">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NGVkMGJmYzJhNGY2NzRjM2YyYWU5YzIzNzg2NGM3ODc.-mzc">
<dd>
Fe(s) + Co ^2+^ (aq) → Fe ^2+^ (aq) + Co(s)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The ions are present in the following concentrations: 0.050 M Fe ^2+^
and 0.020 M Co ^2+^ .

## Lesson Summary {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-kgl}

-   The ability of a particular electrochemical cell to generate an
    electric current is called its electrical potential. Reduction
    potentials measure the tendency of a substance to be reduced in a
    redox reaction.
-   The standard hydrogen electrode is arbitrarily assigned a standard
    reduction potential of 0.00 V, and it serves as a reference by which
    all other half-cell potentials are measured.
-   The standard cell potential for any electrochemical cell can be
    determined by finding the difference in reduction potentials between
    the two half-cells. The cell potential must be positive for the
    overall reaction to be spontaneous.
-   Reduction potentials can be used to make predictions about whether
    reactions will occur and whether a particular oxidizing or reducing
    agent is strong enough for a given purpose.
-   The Nernst equation allows for the calculation of cell potentials
    under non-standard conditions.

## Lesson Review Questions {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-adl}

1.  What does standard reduction potential measure?
2.  Under what conditions is a particular standard cell potential
    (E&lt;deg&gt;; ~cell~ ) determined?
3.  Explain the operation and usefulness of the standard
    hydrogen electrode.
4.  Distinguish the anode adn the cathode in a galvanic cell.
5.  Which species in the following pairs is more likely to be reduced?
    Explain your answer.
    1.  Br ~2~ or Cl ~2~
    2.  Na ^+^ or K ^+^
    3.  PbO ~2~ or PbSO ~4~

6.  Using the given table of standard reduction potentials, calculate E°
    for the following reactions. Under standard conditions, will these
    reactions spontaneously occur in the forward direction?
    1.  Al + 3Ag ^+^ → 3Ag + Al ^3+^
    2.  Zr + 2I ~2~ → Zr ^4+^ + 4I ^-^
    3.  Li ^+^ + Ag → Ag ^+^ + Li

7.  Define each quantity that appears in the Nernst equation, and make
    note of the respective units.
8.  Use the Nernst equation and the given concentrations to calculate E
    for the following reaction at 25°C: NO ~3~ ^-^ (aq) + As(s) → NO(aq)
    + AsO ~2~ ^-^ (aq), where \[NO ~3~ ^-^ \] = 1.0 M, \[NO\] = 0.20 M,
    and \[AsO ~2~ ^-^ \] = 0.010 M. E° for this reaction is equal to
    +2.91 V.
9.  Use the Nernst equation and the given concentrations to calculate E
    for the following reaction at 25°C: 2H ~2~ O(l) + 3Cl ~2~ (g)
    + 2Sb(s) → 6Cl ^-^ (aq) + 2SbO ^+^ (aq) + 4H ^+^ (aq), where \[Cl
    ~2~ \] = 0.80 M, \[Cl ^-^ \] = 1.0 M, \[SbO ^+^ \] = 0.20 M, and \[H
    ^+^ \] = 0.20 M. E° for this reaction is equal to +2.34 V.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#23.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-po1}

-   Table of standard reduction potentials:
    [http://www.jesuitnola.org/upload/clark/refs/red\_pot.htm](red_pot.htm)
-   Derivation of the Nernst equation:
    [http://www.science.uwaterloo.ca/\~cchieh/cact/c123/nernsteq.html](nernsteq.html)
-   Using the Nernst equation:
    [http://www.asdlib.org/onlineArticles/ecourseware/Gross\_Potentiometry/The%20Nernst%20Equation.pdf](The%20Nernst%20Equation.pdf)

## Points to Consider {#23.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-enj}

-   How would comparing elements in the activity series by their
    standard reduction potentials allow us to make predictions about the
    direction of oxidation-reduction reactions?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686173] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686174] -->

# Electrolysis {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2x5c2lz}

## Lesson Objectives {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-6q1}

-   Define electrolysis.
-   Describe the use of electrolysis in the purification of sodium.
-   Understand the basics of the process of refining aluminum.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-tzc}

-   **electrolysis** : The process in which electrical energy is used to
    cause a nonspontaneous chemical reaction to occur.
-   **electrolytic cell** : The apparatus used for carrying out an
    electrolysis reaction; consists of an electrolyte to carry charge
    and two electrodes.
-   **electrometallurgy** : A technique of extracting and purifying
    metals from their ores through use of electrolysis.

## Check Your Understanding {#23.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-laq}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#23.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._2-ji2}

-   Review the activity series and the standard reduction potential
    information to predict how metals will interact with one another.

## Electrolysis {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2x5c2lz_2-5wh}

A galvanic cell uses a spontaneous redox reaction to generate an
electric current. It is also possible to do the opposite. When an
external source of direct current is applied to an electrochemical cell,
a reaction that is normally nonspontaneous can be forced to proceed.
**Electrolysis** is the process in which electrical energy is used to
cause a nonspontaneous chemical reaction to occur. Electrolysis is
responsible for the metal coatings that appear on many everyday objects,
such as gold-plated or silver-plated jewelry and chrome-plated car
bumpers.

An **electrolytic cell** is the apparatus used for carrying out an
electrolysis reaction. **Figure**
[below](#23.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMjMtMTAtRWxlY3Ryb2x5dGljLUNlbGw.) shows
an electrolytic cell composed of Zn|Zn ^2+^ and Cu|Cu ^2+^ half-cells.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-Nzc4Y2U2ZDNkNzY3ZjlmMWQxNmM5ZmFhZmVhODgyNjc.-dmw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.shutterstock.com" -->
<!-- @@license="Used under license from Shutterstock.com" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429597522.png)

**Figure 23.11**

An electrolytic cell uses an external power source (a battery) to drive
a nonspontaneous reaction. The copper half-cell undergoes oxidation,
while the zinc half-cell undergoes reduction.

</div>

Recall that in the last section, this same pair of half-cells was used
as an example of a voltaic cell. In the spontaneous direction, Zn metal
is oxidized to Zn ^2+^ ions while Cu ^2+^ ions are reduced to Cu metal.
In a voltaic cell, the zinc electrode would be the anode and the copper
electrode would be the cathode. However, when the same half-cells are
connected to a battery via an external wire, the reaction is forced to
run in the opposite direction. The zinc electrode is now the cathode and
the copper electrode is the anode.

![&\\text{Oxidation (anode):} && \\text{Cu}(s) \\rightarrow
\\text{Cu}\^{2+}(aq) + 2\\text{e}\^- &&\\text{E}\^0 = -0.34 \\ \\text{V}
\\\\\\&\\text{Reduction (cathode):} && \\text{Zn}\^{2+}(aq) +
2\\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow \\text{Zn}(s) && \\text{E}\^0 = -0.76 \\
\\text{V} \\\\\\\\hline&\\text{Overall reaction:} && \\text{Cu}(s) +
\\text{Zn}\^{2+}(aq) \\rightarrow \\text{Cu}\^{2+}(aq) + \\text{Zn}(s)
&&\\text{E}\^0\_{\\text{cell}} = -1.10 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/7756930a4b3dad54e42f77ad99c4cabc.png)

The standard cell potential is negative, indicating a nonspontaneous
reaction. The battery must be capable of delivering at least 1.10 V of
direct current in order for the reaction to occur.

## Commercial Electrolysis Reactions {#23.html#x-ck12-Q29tbWVyY2lhbCBFbGVjdHJvbHlzaXMgUmVhY3Rpb25z_2-mpx}

### Electrolysis of Molten Sodium Chloride {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2x5c2lz_2IG9mIE1vbHRlbiBTb2RpdW0gQ2hsb3JpZGU.-sda}

Several electrolysis reactions are commonly performed on a large scale
for the commercial production of certain substances. For example, molten
(liquid) sodium chloride can be electrolyzed to produce sodium metal and
chlorine gas. The electrolytic cell used in this process is called a
Down’s cell ( **Figure**
[below](#23.html#x-ck12-SW50Q2gtMjMtMTEtRG93bnMtQ2VsbA..) ).

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-NDFhNWRiOGE2Y2M0YWU1M2FkMjMzNjE4ZjgwOWI3ZDE.-r72"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429712281.png)

**Figure 23.12**

A Down’s cell is used for the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride.
Liquid sodium metal is produced at the cathode, while chlorine gas is
produced at the anode.

</div>

In a Down’s cell, the liquid sodium ions are reduced at the cathode to
liquid sodium metal. At the anode, liquid chloride ions are oxidized to
chlorine gas. The reactions and cell potentials are shown below.

![&\\text{Oxidation (anode):} && 2\\text{Cl}\^-(l) \\rightarrow
\\text{Cl}\_2(g) + 2\\text{e}\^- &&\\text{E}\^0 = -1.36 \\ \\text{V}
\\\\\\&\\text{Reduction (cathode):} && \\text{Na}\^+(l) + \\text{e}\^-
\\rightarrow \\text{Na}(l) && \\text{E}\^0 = -2.71 \\ \\text{V}
\\\\\\\\hline&\\text{Overall reaction:} && 2\\text{Na}\^+(l) +
2\\text{Cl}\^-(l) \\rightarrow 2\\text{Na}(l) + \\text{Cl}\_2(g)
&&\\text{E}\^0\_{\\text{cell}} = -4.07 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/85dd3072108abbcc525041ca9c6004b6.png)

The battery must supply over 4 volts to carry out this electrolysis.
This reaction is a major industrial source of chlorine gas, and it is
the primary way to obtain pure sodium metal. Chlorine gas is widely used
as a disinfectant, such as in swimming pools.

### Electrolysis of Water {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2x5c2lz_2IG9mIFdhdGVy-hbc}

The electrolysis of water produces hydrogen and oxygen gases. The
electrolytic cell consists of a pair of platinum electrodes immersed in
water containing a small amount of an electrolyte, such as H ~2~ SO ~4~
. The electrolyte is necessary because pure water does not contain
enough ions to effectively conduct a current. At the anode, water is
oxidized to oxygen gas and hydrogen ions. At the cathode, water is
reduced to hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions.

![&\\text{Oxidation (anode):} && 2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l) \\rightarrow
\\text{O}\_2(g) + 4\\text{H}\^+(aq) + 4\\text{e}\^- &&\\text{E}\^0 =
-1.23 \\ \\text{V} \\\\\\&\\text{Reduction (cathode):} &&
4\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l) + 4\\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow 2\\text{H}\_2(g)
+ 4\\text{OH}\^-(aq) && \\text{E}\^0 = -0.83 \\ \\text{V}
\\\\\\\\hline&\\text{Overall reaction:} && 2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l)
\\rightarrow \\text{O}\_2(g) + 2\\text{H}\_2(g)
&&\\text{E}\^0\_{\\text{cell}} = -2.06 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/0bd6e4d740d3adcd3b1c86348eb1043a.png)

The hydrogen ion and hydroxide ions produced in each reaction combine to
form water, resulting in the net reaction shown above. The added
electrolyte is not consumed in the reaction. In this process, the
hydrogen in the water is reduced (from +1 to 0) and the oxygen is
oxidized (from -2 to 0). This process was discovered in 1800 by William
Nicholson and Johann Ritter. One modern-day application is the
generation of oxygen for use in sealed vehicles, such as spacecrafts and
submarines.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-MjlmMWMzMjVkNzRmZTkzZDNmYmVjZjk2ZmE4ZDJhNDk.-qtk"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235429832308.png)

**Figure 23.13**

Apparatus for the production of hydrogen and oxygen gases by the
electrolysis of water.

</div>

### Electrolysis of Aqueous Sodium Chloride {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb2x5c2lz_2IG9mIEFxdWVvdXMgU29kaXVtIENobG9yaWRl-m3a}

Earlier we examined the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride. It may
be logical to assume that the electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride,
called brine, would yield the same result by the same reactions.
However, the reduction reaction that occurs at the cathode does not
produce sodium metal, because the water is reduced instead. This is
because the reduction potential for water is only −0.83 V compared to
−2.71 V for the reduction of sodium ions. This makes the reduction of
water preferable, because its reduction potential is less negative.
Chlorine gas is still produced at the anode, just as in the electrolysis
of molten NaCl.

![&\\text{Oxidation (anode):} && 2\\text{Cl}\^-(aq) \\rightarrow
\\text{Cl}\_2(g) + 2\\text{e}\^- &&\\text{E}\^0 = -1.36 \\ \\text{V}
\\\\\\&\\text{Reduction (cathode):} && 2\\text{H}\_2\\text{O}(l) +
2\\text{e}\^- \\rightarrow \\text{H}\_2(g) + 2\\text{OH}\^-(aq) &&
\\text{E}\^0 = -0.83 \\ \\text{V} \\\\\\\\hline&\\text{Overall
reaction:} && 2\\text{Cl}\^-(aq) \\rightarrow \\text{O}\_2(g) +
2\\text{H}\_2(g) &&\\text{E}\^0\_{\\text{cell}} = -2.06 \\
\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/dd682f9a5da43c25c9778bc2a4746eb1.png)

Since the hydroxide ion is also a product of the net reaction, the
important chemical sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is obtained by evaporating
the water after the hydrolysis is complete.

### Electrometallurgy {#23.html#x-ck12-RWxlY3Ryb21ldGFsbHVyZ3k._2-9cx}

The extraction of metals from ores and the purification of metals is
often accomplished using **electrometallurgy** . Most metals are found
in nature in an oxidized form (usually an oxide or a sulfide) called an
ore. If the ore is either dissolved in an aqueous solution or melted,
passing an electric current through the material causes the pure metal
to be deposited on one of the electrodes. This process was used by the
English chemist Humphrey Davy to isolate metallic sodium from a solution
of sodium hydroxide, and several other elements were discovered in the
next several years using this same technique.

We saw earlier that sodium is most commonly produced by electrolysis of
molten sodium chloride. Many other metals are also isolated and purified
using electrometallurgy techniques, including gold, silver, copper,
aluminum, lead, and many alkali and rare earth metals. For some metals,
this is the only financially viable method of extraction and
purification. In addition to the production of a desired metal, these
techniques are also being studied for use in the processing of nuclear
wastes and the cleanup of environmental contamination by toxic metals.

Aluminum is one example of a substance that was very rare in its pure
form before electrometallurgy techniques were developed but is now
extremely common. Aluminum ore (bauxite) is predominantly aluminum oxide
(Al ~2~ O ~3~ ). Refinement of the metal by simple heating, as is done
with iron ore, is ineffective, because the melting point of the aluminum
ore is so high (&gt; 2000°C). Instead, the bauxite is first mixed with
sodium hydroxide at high temperatures to remove the other contaminants
from the aluminum oxide. This material is then recrystallized and
separated from other ore residues. Then, the purified aluminum oxide is
dissolved in a molten mixture of calcium fluoride and cryolite (an
aluminum fluoride-sodium fluoride salt that melts at 1012°C). The lower
melting point of the cryolite allows the aluminum ore to dissolve at a
temperature that is much lower than its own melting point. The resulting
solution is then electrolyzed using carbon electrodes at a temperature
of 950-980Udeg;C. The aluminum cations are reduced to neutral aluminum
at the cathode (Al ^3+^ → Al ^0^ ), and the oxygen anions are oxidized
back to molecular oxygen at the anode (2 O ^2-^ → O ~2~ ).

One problem with current methods of aluminum production is the
generation of environmental contaminants. Hydrogen fluoride gas is an
extremely corrosive and toxic byproduct that must be trapped and
neutralized. Other fluorides and metals contaminants can also pollute
water, soil, and air if not carefully managed.

A major expense in the refinement of aluminum is the cost of electrical
power. Refining plants are usually located in areas where electricity is
abundant and less expensive. Producing aluminum from recycled materials
uses only about 5% of the electricity needed to produce the aluminum
from bauxite, which makes aluminum recycling profitable as well as
environmentally beneficial.

## Corrosion {#23.html#x-ck12-Q29ycm9zaW9u_2-ct6}

**Corrosion** involves the formation of an oxidized form of a metal by
an electrochemical process. A common example is the rusting of iron when
exposed to water and oxygen. The tarnishing of silver and the red or
green deposits formed on copper are other examples. Corrosion in all its
forms costs the U.S. millions of dollars each year in expenses for metal
replacement.

<div
id="23.html#x-ck12-MjhhMTZhZmQwZjQ5Mzg4YTFjNDEyNGI2NWQ3ZTM4NDc.-irv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Flickr:jmettraux" -->
<!-- @@url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jmettraux/5078397648/" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.0" -->
![](ck12_23_files/20151009235430030420.jpeg)

**Figure 23.14**

</div>

Rust formation involves a complex series of reactions that are still not
well-understood. The first part of the overall process appears to be the
following reaction:

<dl id="x-ck12-OTM2YTI1YTgxZWQ5M2FmOGU1MTAwNDc5MmQwZmJlZjU.-73h">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTM2YTI1YTgxZWQ5M2FmOGU1MTAwNDc5MmQwZmJlZjU.-9ib">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-OTM2YTI1YTgxZWQ5M2FmOGU1MTAwNDc5MmQwZmJlZjU.-oz4">
<dd>
2 Fe + O ~2~ + 4 H ^+^ → 2 Fe ^2+^ + 2 H ~2~ O

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
The iron then undergoes further oxidation in the presence of O ~2~ to
form ferric oxide (Fe ~2~ O ~3~ ). The complete process is somewhat more
complex.

The corrosion of copper involves a reaction with carbonic acid, which is
formed when atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolves in water. This acid is
weak and unstable, but it can produce significant damage over time. The
reaction between copper and carbonic acid generates copper carbonate,
which is responsible for the familiar blue-green layer seen on
structures such as the Statue of Liberty.

Silver will tarnish through a similar type of reaction with hydrogen
sulfide, which is found in low concentrations in the atmosphere and is
often generated by foods with a high sulfur content, such as eggs. The
tarnish in this case is silver sulfide (Ag ~2~ S).

One common approach to minimize the corrosion of metals is to attach a
strip of a more active metal, sometimes called a sacrificial metal, to
the structure. For example, putting aluminum rings on iron or steel
structures helps prevent rusting. Since aluminum is higher than iron in
the activity series, it can be used to reduce iron cations back to
neutral Fe. Eventually, the aluminum will all be converted to Al ^3+^
cations and must be replaced.

## Lesson Summary {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-9wy}

-   Electrolysis uses an external source of electricity to drive
    nonspontaneous redox reactions.
-   Several metals (including sodium and aluminum) are manufactured
    using electrolytic processes.
-   Corrosion involves the deterioration of a neutral metal into an
    oxidized form, which exists as an ionic complex with oxide, sulfide,
    carbonate, or other anions.
-   Attaching strips of neutral metals that are higher in the activity
    series can protect a structure from corrosion.

## Lesson Review Questions {#23.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-iuz}

1.  How does an electrolytic cell differ from a galvanic cell?
2.  Explain how to produce sodium from sodium chloride.
3.  Define electrometallurgy and explain some of its primary uses.
4.  Why is cryolite used to dissolve aluminum oxide in the refining of
    aluminum?
5.  Why is fluoride contamination a problem in the refining of aluminum?
6.  Write the molecular equation and the half-reactions for each of the
    following processes:
    1.  copper + carbonic acid
    2.  silver + hydrogen sulfide

7.  You want to build a boat with a tin bottom. You can use screws made
    out of either iron or copper. Which metal would be best for
    fastening the tin to the bottom of the boat?
8.  In order to prevent iron storage tanks from rusting, they have
    magnesium attached to them. Explain why this process minimizes
    rusting of the iron.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#23.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-myl}

-   Electrolysis of molten salts:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l0V4MBKQXjs](watch?v=l0V4MBKQXjs)
-   Mining and refining aluminum:
    [http://science.howstuffworks.com/aluminum2.htm](aluminum2.htm)
-   Chemistry of corrosion:
    [http://www.ce.sc.edu/deptinfo/members/faculty/ray/web1/Ugrad/ECIV%20303/Corrosion/Set2%20Chemistry%20of%20corrosion.pdf](Set2%20Chemistry%20of%20corrosion.pdf)

## Points to Consider {#23.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-yv9}

-   Oxidation-reduction calculations play important roles in other areas
    of chemistry.
-   Cell potentials in biology are another useful application
    of electrochemistry.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686174] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#23.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-xmb}

1.  Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
2.  Aldolphe Ganot.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Voltaic\_pile\_battery.png](File:Voltaic_pile_battery.png) .
    Public Domain
3.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
4.  User:Tympanus/De.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zinc-carbon-english.svg](File:Zinc-carbon-english.svg) .
    Public Domain
5.  User:Tympanus/De.Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Swissroll-battery-english.svg](File:Swissroll-battery-english.svg) .
    Public Domain
6.  User:HandigeHarry/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fuel\_cell\_EN.svg](File:Fuel_cell_EN.svg) .
    Public Domain
7.  Lukas A, CZE.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CR2032\_disassembled.jpg](File:CR2032_disassembled.jpg) .
    Public Domain
8.  Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
9.  Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
10. .
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Walther\_Nernst\_%28Nobel%29.png](File:Walther_Nernst_%28Nobel%29.png) .
    Public Domain
11. Image copyright Leremy, 2014, modified by CK-12 Foundation.
    [http://www.shutterstock.com](www.shutterstock.com) . Used under
    license from Shutterstock.com
12. Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
13. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
14. Flickr:jmettraux.
    [http://www.flickr.com/photos/jmettraux/5078397648/]() . CC BY 2.0

<span id="24.html"></span>

# Nuclear Chemistry {#24.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVhciBDaGVtaXN0cnk.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_24_files/20151009235436683406.jpeg)
</span>

Cherenkov radiation is produced when charged particles move through
water faster than the speed at which light travels through water. Water
molecules are excited by this process, and when the excited molecules
return to their ground state, they release photons that produce the blue
light seen in the figure above. One of the places where this type of
situation commonly occurs is inside nuclear reactors. Water is used to
cool the rods containing radioactive material in nuclear reactors, which
use emissions from radioisotopes to produce heat that can drive a
turbine and generate electricity.

Nuclear power plants are used in many countries around the world. As of
2013, there are 434 operational nuclear plants around the world, over
100 of which are found in the U.S. In 2012, nuclear power accounted for
19% of the total U.S. production of electricity. Radioactivity is poorly
understood by the general public. Images of nuclear bombs and runaway
power plant incidents are of great concern to many. However, there are
many useful applications, including medical imaging and treatment using
radioisotopes. In this chapter, we will explore basic ideas about
radioactivity and see how we can use this phenomenon for constructive
purposes.

^United\\ States\\ Nuclear\\ Regulatory\\ Commission.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cerenkov\_Effect.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686176] -->

# Nuclear Radiation {#24.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVhciBSYWRpYXRpb24.}

## Lesson Objectives {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-ytu}

-   Describe the characteristics of radioactive emissions.
-   Complete equations involving radioactive decay when given
    pertinent information.
-   Describe how to measure radioactivity.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-1rc}

-   **radioactivity** : The spontaneous emission of matter and/or energy
    from the unstable nucleus of an atom.
-   **alpha particle** : The nucleus of a helium-4 atom
-   **beta particle** : An electron.
-   **gamma radiation** : Very high energy electromagnetic radiation.
-   **Geiger counter** : A device that measures the frequency of
    radioactive events; composed of a tube filled with an inert gas that
    is able to conduct electricity when exposed to charged radiation.

## Check Your Understanding {#24.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-cqn}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#24.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ..-m7j}

-   How are mass number and atomic number related to the amounts of
    different subatomic particles in a particular atom?
-   What is different about multiple isotopes of a single element?

## A Review of Isotopes {#24.html#x-ck12-QSBSZXZpZXcgb2YgSXNvdG9wZXM.-6xz}

John Dalton first proposed his atomic theory in an 1804 lecture to the
Royal Institution, a prestigious British scientific society. In this
talk, he put forth the idea that all atoms of an element were identical
and that atoms were indestructible. In a little over 100 years, both of
these ideas were shown to be incorrect. Studies on atomic weights led
Frederick Soddy (1877-1956) to the conclusion in 1913 that atoms of a
single element can have more than one possible atomic weight. He won the
Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work in 1921.

At least by our current understanding, a given atom can be defined by
its atomic number and its mass number. The atomic number is the number
of protons in the nucleus. All atoms with a given atomic number are the
same element, because the chemical properties of an atom are primarily
determined by the number of positive charges in its nucleus (and
therefore the number of negatively charged electrons needed to make it
neutral). The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of protons
plus the number of neutrons. Since these particles both have a mass of
approximately 1 amu and electrons are much smaller, the mass number is
approximately equal to the mass of the atom in units of amu.

Isotopes are atoms that have the same atomic number but different atomic
weights. The difference in weight is due to variations in the number of
neutrons within the nucleus. Because they are uncharged, a slight
difference in the number of neutrons has very little effect on the
chemical properties of a given atom. We can designate the mass number of
an isotope (and sometimes the atomic number as well) using numbers to
the left of the chemical symbol. The top number is the mass number, and
the bottom number (if any) is the atomic number. For example, one
isotope of krypton is the following:

<dl id="x-ck12-en2">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qse">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-fw2">
<dd>
![\^{84}\_{36}\\text{Kr}](ck12_math_images_dir/76d513c87eced6fbdb70223772b3b249.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because an atomic number of 36 is implied by the fact that this is an
atom of krypton, we can also write this as just ^84^ Kr. Other ways to
designate this isotope are krypton-84 or Kr-84. The number of neutrons
in the nucleus of this isotope can be determined by subtracting the
atomic number (36) from the mass number (84), giving a value of 48
neutrons.

Remember that the atomic weights listed on the modern periodic table are
weighted averages of all naturally occurring isotopes. For example, the
atomic weight of Cl is listed as 35.453, even though none of the
isotopes of chlorine actually have that atomic weight. Chlorine has many
possible isotopes ranging from ^28^ Cl to ^51^ Cl, but essentially all
naturally occurring chlorine atoms are either ^35^ Cl or ^37^ Cl. Based
on the \~3:1 ratio in which these isotopes occur, the average atomic
weight of chlorine is 35.453 amu. Even though no individual chlorine
atom has a mass of 35.453 amu, a mole of naturally occurring chlorine
atoms will have a mass of 35.453 grams.

## Discovery of Radioactivity {#24.html#x-ck12-RGlzY292ZXJ5IG9mIFJhZGlvYWN0aXZpdHk.-hjo}

In 1896, a researcher named Henri Becquerel was studying the
phosphorescent properties of uranium salts. He believed these properties
were related to X-rays, which had just been discovered the previous year
by Wilhelm Röntgen. However, he soon found that certain properties of
the radiation emitted from uranium did not match those of X-rays. For
example, uranium could expose a photographic plate without any external
input of energy.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-OGNlZmRkMGZlZWM4MjEyMzVmNDY5ZDIyYTMzNzdkYmQ.-uce"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Henri Becquerel" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Becquerel_plate.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235436828835.jpeg)

**Figure 24.1**

By placing a metal cross between the plate and the radioactive uranium
salt, a shadow is left on the plate due to the effects of exposure to
radioactivity.

</div>

Pierre and Marie Curie further studied the properties of uranium salts
in order to understand the details of this newly discovered
**radioactivity** . The major contributions to their work came from
Marie, who showed that the amount of radioactivity present was due to
the amount of a specific element in the sample and was not the result of
a chemical reaction. She discovered the element polonium and named it
after her native Poland. Madame Curie shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in
Physics with her husband Pierre along with Henri Becquerel. She won the
Nobel Prize again in 1911 for her work in Chemistry.

Later on, Ernest Rutherford (whose name you may remember from the Gold
Foil Experiment) showed that there are three distinct types of
radioactive emissions that differ in their mass, their charge, and their
ability to penetrate through various materials. He did not yet know what
these emissions were, and designated them as alpha (α), beta (β), and
gamma (γ) radiation.

We now know that radioactivity involves the spontaneous emission of
matter and/or energy from the nucleus of an atom. The most common
radioactive atoms have high atomic numbers and contain a large excess of
neutrons. All isotopes of elements with an atomic number of 84
(polonium) or higher are radioactive, including familiar radioactive
materials such as radon (atomic number 86), uranium (atomic number 92),
and plutonium (atomic number 94). Additionally, two lighter elements
(technetium, atomic number 43, and promethium, atomic number 61) have no
stable isotopes. Most elements have both stable and radioactive
isotopes. For example, hydrogen-1 and carbon-12 are stable, but
hydrogen-3 (tritium) and carbon-14 are both radioactive. These isotopes
make up an extremely small percentage of any naturally occurring sample
of their respective elements.

## Types of Radioactive Decay {#24.html#x-ck12-VHlwZXMgb2YgUmFkaW9hY3RpdmUgRGVjYXk.-n6v}

### Alpha Emission {#24.html#x-ck12-QWxwaGEgRW1pc3Npb24.-atc}

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MmQ3NDY5YWUxMWNjYWM4MjBhMDQ2ZTdjNDI0MjA4NGE.-zka"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Inductiveload/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alpha_Decay.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235436958069.png)

**Figure 24.2**

</div>

Alpha (α) radiation was eventually found to be made up of particles that
consisted of two protons bound to two neutrons. In other words, an
**alpha particle** was simply the nucleus of a helium-4 atom. Because it
does not have any electrons, the alpha particle carries a charge of +2.
In nuclear equations, alpha particles can be represented by any of the
following symbols:

<dl id="x-ck12-nxn">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-4mp">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2ts">
<dd>
![\\alpha \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \^4\_2\\alpha \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\
\^4\_2\\text{He}](ck12_math_images_dir/9c28a220227085ec4f08421056a3e3a4.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
A typical alpha decay reaction is the conversion of uranium-238 to
thorium-234:

![\^{238}\_{\\phantom{0}92}\\text{U} \\rightarrow
\^{234}\_{\\phantom{0}90}\\text{Th}+\^4\_2\\alpha](ck12_math_images_dir/5d8ae04ba74c7421b249615baf5f02d6.png)

Many of the largest elements in the periodic table are alpha-emitters.
Notice that in this nuclear equation, the total mass number and the
total atomic number are both conserved. The sum of the mass numbers and
atomic numbers of the products are equal to the mass number and atomic
number of the parent nucleus. This is a general feature of nuclear
reactions. As a result, knowing that a specific nucleus decays by
emitting alpha particles allows us to predict the product nucleus; we
simply need to decrease the mass number by 4 and the atomic number by 2.
The change in atomic number indicates a change in the element's
identity. The new element can be found by looking at the periodic table.

### Beta Emission {#24.html#x-ck12-QmV0YSBFbWlzc2lvbg..-xmq}

Beta (β) emission is a slightly more complicated process. Unlike
α-emission, which simply expels some of the existing subatomic particles
from the nucleus, β-emission also involves the transformation of a
neutron into a proton and an electron. The proton remains bound to the
nucleus, while the electron is ejected.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MTQyNDI2ZDJiZGVjN2RkYWM2NjA1Nzk0MzE4NzRkMWE.-qv8"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Inductiveload/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beta-minus_Decay.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437055380.png)

**Figure 24.3**

</div>

As it turns out, the beta radiation observed by early nuclear chemists
was simply the result of ejected electrons. For historical reasons, the
electron is sometimes referred to as a **beta particle** in this
context. In nuclear equations, beta particles can be represented by any
of the following symbols:

<dl id="x-ck12-jb4">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2wz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-qx0">
<dd>
![\\beta \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\beta\^- \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\
\^{\\phantom{0}0}\_{-1}\\beta \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\
\^{\\phantom{0}0}\_{-1}e \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\
e\^-](ck12_math_images_dir/6c0eea0416c3d1d504df2d9174f52a82.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Although an electron technically has a very small mass, considering an
electron as though its mass is zero makes it easier to balance nuclear
equations. During beta decay, the parent nucleus increases its atomic
number by 1, but the mass number stays the same. This follows the idea
that charge is also conserved in radioactive decay. A typical beta decay
process involves carbon-14, which is used in radioactive dating
techniques:

![\^{14}\_{\\phantom{0}6}\\text{C}\\rightarrow
\^{14}\_{\\phantom{0}7}\\text{N}+\^{\\phantom{0}0}\_{-1}e](ck12_math_images_dir/d149c497aa3159ec96bd1dee2fd54fa1.png)

### Positron Emission {#24.html#x-ck12-UG9zaXRyb24gRW1pc3Npb24.-zp6}

A **positron** is the antimatter version of an electron. It has the same
mass as an electron but the opposite charge. A positron can be
designated by the following symbols:

<dl id="x-ck12-bxm">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-ukb">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-0pm">
<dd>
![\\beta\^+ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \^{\\phantom{0}0}\_{+1}\\beta \\ \\
\\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \^{\\phantom{0}0}\_{+1}e \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\ \\
e\^+](ck12_math_images_dir/c1842c842ff9553a05828eddec93f253.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
During a nuclear decay process that occurs by positron emission, a
proton is converted into a neutron and a positron. The neutron remains
in the nucleus, and the positron is expelled. Overall, the atomic number
of the parent nucleus increases by one, and the mass number is
unchanged. For example, carbon-11 emits a positron to become boron-11:

![ \^{11}\_{\\phantom{0}6}\\text{C} \\rightarrow
\^{11}\_{\\phantom{0}5}\\text{B}+ \^{\\phantom{0}0} \_{+1}
\\beta](ck12_math_images_dir/000b8c3c403e3d26b039f9ac9ab15199.png)

Positrons represent a special case, because they are a form of
antimatter. When a positron encounters an electron, the two particles
annihilate one another, and all of their mass is converted to pure
energy. This energy is released in the form of two gamma photons
traveling in exactly opposite directions. Because of the abundance of
electrons in any sample of matter, positrons will be consumed almost
immediately in essentially all cases.

### Gamma Emission {#24.html#x-ck12-R2FtbWEgRW1pc3Npb24.-r1g}

**Gamma (γ) radiation** was eventually found to be very high energy
electromagnetic radiation, even more energetic than X-rays. Many nuclear
processes are accompanied by a large release of energy. This energy is
sometimes given off as a photon of gamma radiation. For example, both
alpha and beta decay are often accompanied by the emission of gamma
rays. Because photons have no mass or charge, they do not affect the
mass number or atomic number balance in a nuclear equation. When
included in the equations, the release of gamma radiation is generally
given the symbol
![\^0\_0\\gamma](ck12_math_images_dir/5a73b4599fdf228e75bede35d20d4581.png)
. You will not be required to predict whether a given nuclear reaction
includes the release of gamma rays.

### Penetrating Ability of Emissions {#24.html#x-ck12-UGVuZXRyYXRpbmcgQWJpbGl0eSBvZiBFbWlzc2lvbnM.-rjm}

The various types of emissions discussed above differ considerably in
their ability to penetrate through matter. The α particle has the lowest
penetrating power, primarily because it is the largest commonly expelled
particle. Related to their larger mass, ejected α particles also move
much slower than other types of nuclear decay products. A stream of α
particles can be blocked by a sheet of paper or a human hand.

Beta particles (electrons) have a higher penetrating power than alpha
particles, but they can still be stopped by a thin sheet of aluminum.
However, the materials being bombarded with a high-energy stream of
electrons can also become excited, potentially leading to additional
reactivity.

Of the three basic types of emissions, gamma radiation has the highest
penetrating power. Thick, high density materials (such as lead) are
required to stop gamma emissions. The thickness of the shielding will
determine the effectiveness of the protection offered by the lead.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-NGQ2MWM5ZWMwYjBiNjE3ZDQ5MDBkYzBlMDI3ZjJiNmI.-mln"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Stannered/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alfa_beta_gamma_radiation.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 2.5" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437156110.png)

**Figure 24.4**

</div>

## Detection of Radioactivity {#24.html#x-ck12-RGV0ZWN0aW9uIG9mIFJhZGlvYWN0aXZpdHk.-zsq}

### Units of Measurement {#24.html#x-ck12-VW5pdHMgb2YgTWVhc3VyZW1lbnQ.-6er}

Radioactivity is quantified by measuring the number of decay processes
per unit time. For example, we can measure radioactivity in terms of
counts per minute (cpm), where each "count" is a single decay process,
such as the emission of an α-particle. A sample of one particular
isotope may have an activity of 5,000 cpm, while an equal amount of
another isotope might result in a radiation level of only 250 cpm. For a
given nucleus, the amount of radioactivity gives a rough indication of
the amount of the radioisotope present – the higher the activity, the
more of the radioactive isotope in the sample.

The curie (Ci), named after Marie and Pierre Curie, is another unit that
is commonly used to measure the rate of decay. One curie is equivalent
to 3.7 × 10 ^10^ decay processes per second. Since this is a fairly
large value, radiation is often expressed in millicuries or microcuries.
Another common unit is the becquerel (Bq), named after Henri Becquerel,
which is simply defined as one count per second.

### Exposure to Radiation {#24.html#x-ck12-RXhwb3N1cmUgdG8gUmFkaWF0aW9u-yov}

The units discussed above give us information about the rate of decay
for a radioactive sample, but they do not tell us anything about the
level of exposure experienced by nearby targets, such as people. The
amount of exposure and the resulting medical consequences depend on
various factors, including the type of radiation, its intensity, and the
length of time that the person is exposed to the radioactive material. A
large amount of radiation received over a short period of time is
referred to as acute exposure, whereas low levels of exposure over a
long period of time are referred to as chronic exposure.

Measurement of exposure to radioactivity is important for anyone who
deals with radioactive materials on a regular basis. Perhaps the
simplest device is a personal dosimeter, which is a film badge that will
fog up when exposed to radiation. The amount of fogging is proportional
to the amount of radiation present.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-mk7"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437256509.jpeg)

**Figure 24.5**

</div>

These devices are not very sensitive to low levels of radiation, but
more sensitive devices are also available that reliably measure the
frequency of radioactive events. One such device is the Geiger counter.
A **Geiger counter** is a tube filled with an inert gas that will
conduct electricity when exposed to charged radiation, such as alpha or
beta particles. When a charged particle enters the tube, it changes the
electrical potential between the anode and the cathode, and this change
in potential is registered by an electrical circuit as a single
radioactive event. Geiger counters are fairly inexpensive and reliable,
so they are useful in a wide range of applications. More complicated
types of counters are also available, but are generally used only in
sophisticated experiments.

## Lesson Summary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-0hi}

-   Radioactivity involves the release of particles and/or energy from
    the nucleus of an atom.
-   Alpha emissions consist of the ejection of an alpha particle (a
    helium-4 nucleus) from a radioactive nucleus.
-   Beta emission involves the conversion of a neutron into a proton
    (which remains in the nucleus) and an electron (beta particle) that
    is ejected from the nucleus.
-   Positron emission involves the conversion of a proton into a neutron
    (which remains in the nucleus) and a positron, which is ejected from
    the nucleus.
-   Gamma emission is the release of energy in the form of high energy
    electromagnetic waves.
-   Radiation dosage can be measured in several ways, including personal
    dosimeters and Geiger counters.

## Lesson Review Questions {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-4ps}

### Reviewing Concepts {#24.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz-vxj}

1.  Define radioactivity.
2.  Define the terms below, noting their penetration abilities:
    1.  alpha particle
    2.  beta particle
    3.  positron emission
    4.  gamma emission

3.  Explain how a Geiger counter detects radioactivity.

### Problems {#24.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM.-qlk}

1.  Americium-241 is a radioactive isotope found in many
    smoke detectors. If this nucleus decays by alpha emission, what is
    the decay product?
2.  Write the nuclear decay products after the emission of a beta
    particle by phosphorus-32.
3.  Write the nuclear decay products for the emission of a positron
    by potassium-40.
4.  For each reaction below, indicate the product isotope:
    1.  ![\^{180}\_{\\phantom{0}79}\\text{Au}\\rightarrow
        \\alpha+?](ck12_math_images_dir/99bbc2eab97299f82514ab93b5840aad.png)
    2.  ![\^{189}\_{\\phantom{0}70}\\text{Yb}\\rightarrow \\beta\^- +
        ?](ck12_math_images_dir/f3389dffd3410ee494f4e46ee00b26b6.png)
    3.  ![\^{94}\_{43}\\text{Tc}\\rightarrow \\beta\^+ +
        ?](ck12_math_images_dir/a333214ca975f1441c92ef008b0cd233.png)

5.  For each reaction below, indicate the initial isotope:
    1.  ![?\\rightarrow \\beta\^- +
        \^{98}\_{41}\\text{Nb}](ck12_math_images_dir/b39d744d45bffcca364afa84d9151154.png)
    2.  ![?\\rightarrow \\alpha +
        \^{146}\_{\\phantom{0}64}\\text{Gd}](ck12_math_images_dir/c59b05e831e8b6478037b934caa2f83f.png)

6.  For each reaction below, determine the missing particle:
    1.  ![\^{49}\_{24}\\text{Cr}\\rightarrow
        ?+\^{49}\_{23}\\text{V}](ck12_math_images_dir/08195bd6b662ba459aa3f6dd4c92f120.png)
    2.  ![\^{50}\_{19}\\text{K}\\rightarrow
        ?+\^{50}\_{20}\\text{Ca}](ck12_math_images_dir/ca0fde7be6b0d78239775aa80823122c.png)

## Further Reading / Supplementary Links {#24.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nIC8gU3VwcGxlbWVudGFyeSBMaW5rcw..-fmf}

-   Radioactive decay processes:
    [http://www.chem.duke.edu/\~jds/cruise\_chem/nuclear/stability.html](stability.html)
-   Table of isotopes and decay modes:
    [http://ie.lbl.gov/decay/parent.pdf](parent.pdf)
-   Radiation dosage:
    [http://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/phys\_agents/ionizing.html](ionizing.html)

## Points to Consider {#24.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-w08}

-   How long does a sample of radioactive material remain hazardous?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686176] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686177] -->

# Half-Lives {#24.html#x-ck12-SGFsZi1MaXZlcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-nsv}

-   Define half-life, and be able to perform calculations relating the
    half-life of an isotope to the radioactivity of that isotope
    over time.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-6ke}

-   **half-life** : The amount of time needed for one-half of a sample
    to spontaneously decay.

## Check Your Understanding {#24.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-2o5}

-   What tools can be used to determine the rate at which a radioactive
    substance is undergoing decay?

## Half-Life {#24.html#x-ck12-SGFsZi1MaWZl_1-zyg}

As radioactive substances gradually decay, there is less and less of the
original material present, The **half-life** of an isotope is defined as
the period of time needed for one-half of a sample to spontaneously
decay. Some isotopes have long half-lives, such as uranium-234, which
has a half-life of 245,000 years. Other isotopes have shorter
half-lives. Iodine-131, which is used in thyroid scans, has a half-life
of 8.02 days, and oxygen-15 has a half-life of only 2 minutes.
Information on the half-life of an isotope can be used to calculate how
much of that isotope will be present after a certain period of time. The
**Table** [below](#24.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6SGFsZkxpZmU.) includes the
half-lives of a few other radioactive isotopes.

  Isotope         Decay Mode   Half-Life
  --------------- ------------ -------------------
  Cobalt-60       beta         5.3 years
  Neptunium-237   alpha        2.1 million years
  Polonium-214    alpha        0.00016 seconds
  Radium-224      alpha        3.7 days
  Tritium (H-3)   beta         12 years

**Figure** [below](#24.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjQtNy1kZWNheWN1cnZl)
illustrates a typical decay curve for a radioactive substance. The
amount decreases by one-half after each successive half-life.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MjgyOWNiMjk4MmI4ZWRhMjVhOWZjZDQ2MmYxMzE0YTk.-fnu"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Pieter Kuiper" -->
<!-- @@url="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Activity_decay.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437395950.png)

**Figure 24.6**

This graph shows a decay curve in terms of half-lives and mole percent
of the substance remaining. This is an example of exponential decay.

</div>

One way to measure the amount of radioactive material present is by
looking at the frequency of radioactive emissions with a Geiger counter
or other device. In this section, we will assume that we are dealing
with a nuclear decay process in which the parent nucleus is radioactive
but the resulting nucleus is a stable isotope. When this is the case,
the measured activity will decrease to one-half of its original value
after one half-life has passed. For example, if one hour is required for
the radioactivity of a certain sample to decrease from 30,000 cpm to
15,000 cpm, that isotope has a half-life of one hour.

**Example 24.1**

The isotope iodine-125, which is used in certain medical procedures, has
a half-life of 59.4 days. How many half-lives have passed after 178.2
days? If the initial activity of a sample of iodine-125 is 32,000 cpm,
what will be its activity after 178.2 days?

*Answer:*

Since we know that one half-life is equal to 59.4 days, we can determine
the number of half-lives as follows:

<dl id="x-ck12-4q8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-70j">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-2hs">
<dd>
![\\mathrm{178.2\\;days \\times \\frac{1 \\ half-life}{59.4\\;days}=3\\;
half-lives}](ck12_math_images_dir/c4550db9b1a93a5ab1ca5411ff45244e.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Because this value is a whole number, we can simply divide the original
activity in half once for each half-life:

<dl id="x-ck12-N2M0ZTI4Njg0MmI5MTcyMmJlNzAxYzFhYTkxYzUyMGM.-xwl">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Y2Y2OTQ4MGJiYzUwNGUzY2FiYjU4MzA3OTU1MjVjZTg.-rua">
<dd>
initial activity = 32,000 cpm

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NDc1YjQ0MDViNjNiNWVjZDc1ZjA4MGIyOTI5YjdhNmU.-s2y">
<dd>
after one half-life = 16,000 cpm

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NTFkYjNhY2U5YzJhOWViY2VjM2E0ZmJkYzZiZjM2MDE.-m2x">
<dd>
after two half-lives = 8,000 cpm

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjMwYzM2NzY5MzBmMDg2MjUzYjk0MDRiZDljNzkwZmM.-wui">
<dd>
after three half-lives = 4,000 cpm

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
If the amount of time that has passed is not a simple multiple of the
known half-life, we can use the following equation:

<dl id="x-ck12-f06">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-r4w">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-auf">
<dd>
![N\_t=N\_0 \\times
(0.5)\^{\\frac{t}{t\_{1/2}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/77df4f854fb0f75ef7be85fcde2f79a3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
where N ~t~ is the amount of activity at time t, N ~0~ is the initial
activity (at time = 0), t is the amount of time that has passed, and t
~1/2~ is the half-life of the isotope.

**Example 24.2**

Rubidium-78 has a half-life of 17.67 minutes. If a given sample of Rb-78
has a measured activity of 1.8 × 10 ^4^ cpm, what will be its activity
after one hour has passed?

*Answer:*

Simply plug the given values into the equation above. Note that the
units of the half-life and the total amount of time must match.

<dl id="x-ck12-cyz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-i1p">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-3ok">
<dd>
![N\_t=N\_0 \\times
(0.5)\^{\\frac{t}{t\_{1/2}}}](ck12_math_images_dir/77df4f854fb0f75ef7be85fcde2f79a3.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-uhd">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-xoq">
<dd>
![N\_t=(1.8 \\times 10\^4 \\ cpm) \\times (0.5)\^{\\frac{60 \\
min}{17.67 \\
min}}](ck12_math_images_dir/0b89ad6318171922bb2dc1991e68baea.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-8rz">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-tqd">
<dd>
![N\_t=(1.8 \\times 10\^4 \\ cpm) \\times
(0.5)\^{3.396}](ck12_math_images_dir/7b8c4b7e2a3202c1f4cad15f519a8a28.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-hkw">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-shd">
<dd>
![N\_t=1.7 \\times 10\^3 \\
cpm](ck12_math_images_dir/dd28cd66fd0e734fbc22373d62b9aa69.png)

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
In this section, we have been looking at isotopes that decay directly to
a stable nucleus. However, many isotopes, particularly very heavy ones,
require many successive decays before reaching a stable nucleus. For
example, the decay of uranium-238 results in the production of
thorium-234, which is also radioactive. That decays into
protactinium-234, which is radioactive as well. The complete decay chain
for uranium-238 is illustrated in the **Figure**
[below](#24.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjRfOA..) .

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-ZWI3YjBiYjY0MjFkYzU4N2ExNjk5NWE4YjI0YzdjMjE.-uck"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of US Geological Survey" -->
<!-- @@url="http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2004/1050/uranium.htm" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437523489.png)

**Figure 24.7**

Decay of uranium-238 to a stable end product.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-2my}

-   The half-life of an isotope is the amount of time necessary for one
    half of a given sample to undergo radioactive decay.
-   Half-lives can vary from fractions of a second to millions of years.

## Lesson Review Questions {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-ayh}

### Reviewing Concepts {#24.html#x-ck12-UmV2aWV3aW5nIENvbmNlcHRz_1-lqy}

1.  Define half-life.
2.  From the chart of half-lives referenced below, list the half-lives
    of:
    1.  californium-251
    2.  iodine-131
    3.  uranium-238

## Problems {#24.html#x-ck12-UHJvYmxlbXM._1-cmm}

1.  An isotope has a half-life of 2.4 days. How many half-lives have
    passed if you measure the activity after 9.6 days?
2.  A radioactive sample has an initial activity of 36,000 cpm and a
    half-life of 14.6 minutes. What will be the activity after three
    half-lives?
3.  A radioactive sample has an activity of 450 cpm three half-lives
    after the initial activity was determined. What was the original
    activity?
4.  A sample of a certain isotope has an initial activity of 40,000 cpm.
    After 24.8 days, the activity is 2500 cpm. What is the half-life of
    this isotope?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#24.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-nr8}

-   Half-life calculator:
    [http://www.1728.org/halflife.htm](halflife.htm)
-   Chart of half-lives for all radioactive isotopes:
    [http://www.evs.anl.gov/pub/doc/tbl2-rad-prop.pdf](tbl2-rad-prop.pdf)

## Points to Consider {#24.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-khq}

-   We have learned of various spontaneous decay processes that cause
    new isotopes to be produced. Are there other ways to cause nuclear
    reactions?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686177] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686178] -->

# Fission and Fusion {#24.html#x-ck12-Rmlzc2lvbiBhbmQgRnVzaW9u}

## Lesson Objectives {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-cyf}

-   Define nuclear fission and nuclear fusion.
-   Write fission reactions and identify the components of
    these reactions.
-   Describe the fission reactions employed in nuclear power plants.
-   Write examples of nuclear fusion reactions.
-   List the difficulties associated with using fusion reactions to
    generate power.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-lrp}

-   **nuclear fission** : The process of bombarding heavy nuclei with
    neutrons, causing them to split into two smaller nuclei.
-   **nuclear reactor** : A technology used in nuclear power plants to
    facilitate fission chain reactions in order to vaporize steam, which
    then powers turbines and generates electricity.
-   **nuclear fusion** : The process of combining small nuclei into
    larger nuclei, creating large amounts of energy.

## Check Your Understanding {#24.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-ym3}

-   What are the various types of spontaneous nuclear decay?

## Nuclear Fission {#24.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVhciBGaXNzaW9u_2-1h0}

Radioactive decay, such as the emission of alpha or beta particles, is
not the only way that nuclei can be transformed into other isotopes. As
it turns out, bombarding certain heavy nuclei with neutrons will cause
them to split into two smaller nuclei, in a process known as **nuclear
fission** . Nuclear fission was first discovered by the German
scientists Fritz Strassman and Otto Hahn in the 1930s. They began their
work by bombarding atoms of uranium with neutrons, hoping to create
other large elements. Instead, they were surprised to find barium-141, a
much smaller element. Later on in collaboration with Austrian physicist
Lise Meitner, they demonstrated the release of neutrons and a large
amount of energy along with the smaller nuclei.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-Nzk5MWFhZTZiYzI0ZWRhMjI3N2JkOWUwNWI5ZDcyMzc.-tf5"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nuclear_fission.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437687211.png)

**Figure 24.8**

The products of a nuclear fission reaction include smaller nuclei,
neutrons, and energy.

</div>

**Figure** [above](#24.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjRfMTA.) illustrates the
basic nuclear fission process. A neutron (generally produced by some
controlled process, not usually a natural event) collides with an atom
of uranium-235. Then, a very unstable U-236 atom forms, which proceeds
to split into two smaller nuclei (Kr-92 and Ba-141). This process also
results in the release of three new neutrons and a large amount of
energy.

In **Figure** [below](#24.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjRfMTFfZmlzc2lvbg..) , we
see the possible fates of the newly generated neutrons. Some will be
lost to the surroundings, and others will collide with non-fissionable
nuclei, such as uranium-238. However, some will collide with other U-235
atoms, thus propagating the fission process and releasing even more
neutrons. We will see later how this propagation of neutrons can be
employed in a nuclear reactor to generate electricity.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-YjJlZDkxYWEyYWU3ZmUxOTcwN2UwOTQ0MmU3NzYzOTQ.-izj"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fission_chain_reaction.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437808567.png)

**Figure 24.9**

Nuclear fission can be thought of as a chain reaction.

</div>

As with the equations for nuclear decay, fission reactions are balanced
in terms of both mass number and atomic number. For example, the fission
process illustrated in the **Figure**
[above](#24.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjRfMTFfZmlzc2lvbg..) is represented by
the following equation:

![\^{235}\_{\\phantom{0}92}\\text{U}+\^1\_0n\\rightarrow\^{92}\_{36}\\text{Kr}+\^{141}\_{\\phantom{0}56}\\text{Ba}+3\^1\_0n+\\text{energy}](ck12_math_images_dir/85949fec809b68e3da0677d076a91bc0.png)

On each side of the equation, the mass numbers add up to 236 and the
atomic numbers add up to 92. Another set of possible fission products
from U-235 is formed by the following nuclear reaction:

![\^{235}\_{\\phantom{0}92}\\text{U}+\^1\_0n\\rightarrow
\^{87}\_{35}\\text{Br}+\^{146}\_{\\phantom{0}57}\\text{La}+3\^1\_0n+\\text{energy}](ck12_math_images_dir/e8496b8dd15e208e81553c0253f4ae51.png)

Again both the mass numbers and the atomic numbers are balanced on each
side of the equation.

## Nuclear Power Generation {#24.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVhciBQb3dlciBHZW5lcmF0aW9u_2-x4e}

The generation of electricity is critical for the operation of nearly
all aspects of modern society. The following diagram illustrates the
types of fuels used to generate electrical power in the Unites States.
In 2009, almost 45% of the power generated in the U.S. was derived from
coal, with natural gas making up another 23% of the total. The third
primary source of electrical energy is nuclear power, which accounts for
approximately 20% of the total amount generated. All of these fuels give
off energy in the form of heat. This heat is used to convert water into
steam, which is then used to turn a turbine, thus generating electrical
power.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-NTg2Yzk5ZGEyMmY0MzY5YTBmYTZhY2FmOWIzODExNzc.-rmr"
class="x-ck12-img-fullpage x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Daniel Cardenas" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2008_US_electricity_generation_by_source_v2.png" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY 3.0" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235437918632.png)

**Figure 24.10**

Electricity is one of the main sources of energy used to generate power
and is derived from many processes.

</div>

**Figure** [below](#24.html#x-ck12-QmNoZW1fMjRfMTM.) shows the layout of
a typical nuclear power plant which employs **nuclear reactors** to
generate energy. The radioactive rods are in the red container, where
the energy released during the fission process is used to vaporize water
into steam. The steam passes through the turbine and causes the turbine
to spin, generating electricity. As the steam condenses, it is run
through a cooling tower to lower its temperature. The water then
recirculates through the reactor core to be used again.

The control rods, generally made of boron or various metal alloys, play
an important role in the modulation of the nuclear chain reaction. Each
fission event produces more neutrons than were present initially. If
each neutron caused the fission of another atom of U-235, this chain
reaction would accelerate, resulting in more and more energy and
neutrons being released. The purpose of the control rods is to absorb
excess neutrons, which regulates the rate of the chain reaction and
prevents overheating. If enough energy were released all at once, a
nuclear meltdown might occur, in which the radioactive material starts
to melt and leak out of the reactor core along with the water. Control
rods help to prevent this type of situation.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-Yzk5NDg0OWZiYTA1NDZiMDJhNGVmNjZiYjUzZTgzYTI.-uko"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, User:Andrew c, User:Stannered, and User:Wrleach/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tmi-2_schematic_revised.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438062248.png)

**Figure 24.11**

</div>

## Nuclear Fusion {#24.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVhciBGdXNpb24._2-kde}

In contrast to nuclear fission, in which smaller nuclei are created from
a larger nucleus, **nuclear fusion** combines smaller nuclei into larger
ones. If the starting nuclei are very small, this process releases an
extremely large amount of energy. The fusion of hydrogen atoms into
helium is responsible for the energy released by the Sun and other small
stars. A typical fusion reaction is shown in the following figure:

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-YmY1MjhmNGUzOGMyNGVjOGFhOWQ1NWY5MWI1ODk5NTk.-y9g"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Wykis" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Deuterium-tritium_fusion.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438187196.png)

**Figure 24.12**

Collisions between hydrogen atoms demonstrate one form of nuclear
fusion.

</div>

In this reaction, two different isotopes of hydrogen collide to form a
helium-4 nucleus, which is much more stable. A neutron is also ejected,
along with the release of large amounts of energy often in the form of
gamma rays. Hydrogen-2 (deuterium) and hydrogen-3 (tritium) can be
formed by other fusion reactions between isolated protons and neutrons.
All of these particles are plentiful in the extremely high temperatures
present inside a star.

Larger stars are also fueled by fusion reactions involving heavier
nuclei, such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. However, the principle is
the same; smaller nuclei collide and fuse into a larger nucleus,
resulting in the release of energy.

Because so much energy is released during nuclear fusion, being able to
reproduce this process in a controlled fashion would provide almost
limitless amounts of energy. Additionally, the waste products from
fusion reactions are generally not radioactive, so this would be a much
less hazardous source of nuclear energy than fission reactors.

Unfortunately, nuclear fusion reactions generally require temperatures
in the millions of degrees, which is very difficult to achieve in the
laboratory. The development of other methods to force atoms close enough
together to cause a reaction have been limited, and harnessing the
energy released by nuclear fusion reactions is not yet a feasible
option.

## Lesson Summary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-0ry}

-   Nuclear fission reactions are initiated when certain heavy nuclei,
    such as uranium-235, collide with free neutrons. The products of a
    fission reaction are two smaller isotopes, more neutrons, and a
    great deal of energy.
-   Nuclear reactors use fission reactions to vaporize water. The
    resulting steam is used to drive a turbine, which
    generates electricity.
-   Nuclear fusion involves the collision of smaller atoms to form
    larger ones. Extremely large amounts of energy are released in
    this process.
-   Nuclear fusion reactions occur in stars but are difficult to
    reproduce in a controlled laboratory setting, due to the extreme
    temperatures required.

## Lesson Review Questions {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-a2y}

1.  Define nuclear fission.
2.  What happens to newly generated neutrons in nuclear fission
    reactions?
3.  Write two different fission reactions involving U-235.
4.  Explain how radioactive isotopes can be used to
    generate electricity.
5.  Define nuclear fusion.
6.  Describe the problems associated with the development of nuclear
    fusion as a feasible power source.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#24.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-fpq}

-   Animation of nuclear fission process:
    [http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/86/UFission.gif](UFission.gif)
-   Fusion reactions in the sun:
    [http://zebu.uoregon.edu/\~soper/Sun/fusionsteps.html](fusionsteps.html)
-   Nuclear reactions in the sun:
    [http://www.cartage.org.lb/en/themes/sciences/chemistry/nuclearchemistry/NuclearReactions/NuclearFusion/NuclearFusion.htm](NuclearFusion.htm)
-   Comparison between fission and fusion reactions:
    [http://www.diffen.com/difference/Nuclear\_Fission\_vs\_Nuclear\_Fusion](Nuclear_Fission_vs_Nuclear_Fusion)

## Points to Consider {#24.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-dah}

-   Do radioisotopes have any constructive uses other than energy
    production?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686178] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686179] -->

# Applications of Radioactivity {#24.html#x-ck12-QXBwbGljYXRpb25zIG9mIFJhZGlvYWN0aXZpdHk.}

## Lesson Objectives {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._3-0fm}

-   Describe sources of radiation in our environment.
-   Describe the effects of nuclear radiation on living systems.
-   Describe the use of radioisotopes in the diagnosis and treatment of
    various diseases.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._3-8ql}

-   **cancer cell** : A cell in which the control processes that
    regulate cell growth and division are not working properly.
-   **PET scan** : A medical technique known as positron emission
    tomography which is used to study processes in the brain.

## Check Your Understanding {#24.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_3-gjf}

-   What is the relative penetrating power for each type of radioactive
    decay?
-   What happens to a positron when it collides with an electron?

## Introduction {#24.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_3-ooc}

Previously, you learned about certain devices such as a Geiger counter
which are used to measure exposure to radiation. In this lesson you will
learn about the negative effects of different radiation sources in our
lives, as well as some positive ways in which radiation can be used in
the medical field.

## Environmental Sources of Radiation {#24.html#x-ck12-RW52aXJvbm1lbnRhbCBTb3VyY2VzIG9mIFJhZGlhdGlvbg.._3-egc}

We are all exposed to a small amount of radiation in our daily lives.
Much of this exposure is due to naturally occurring radioactive
substances and cosmic radiation (literally high energy particles flying
in from space). For example, radon is a colorless, odorless gas formed
from the decay of various uranium and thorium isotopes, which are found
in the soil throughout much of the U.S. As a noble gas, radon is
chemically inert, but it is also radioactive and can easily be inhaled
into the lungs. Radon exposure is highest in homes that lack good air
circulation, which would allow the gas to be cycled out of the
residence. Fortunately, there are a number of inexpensive approaches to
decreasing your exposure to radon.

## Effects of Radiation {#24.html#x-ck12-RWZmZWN0cyBvZiBSYWRpYXRpb24._3-gip}

Radiation can seriously harm living organisms, including humans. In
order to better understand how nuclear radiation causes damage on the
cellular level, we should first understand the basics of how the cell
works. DNA in the nucleus is responsible for protein synthesis and for
the regulation of many cellular functions. In the process of protein
synthesis, DNA partially unfolds to produce messenger RNA (mRNA). The
mRNA leaves the nucleus and interacts with ribosomes, transfer RNA,
amino acids, and other cellular constituents in the cytoplasm. Through a
complex series of reactions, proteins are produced to carry out a number
of specialized processes within the organism. Anything that disturbs
this flow of reactions can damage to the cell.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-cha"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438312286.jpeg)

**Figure 24.13**

</div>

The most harmful situation is when nuclear radiation does something to
alter the structure of the DNA. If this prevents the production of a
crucial protein, the cell will malfunction or die. In an even worse
scenario, some changes to DNA will cause the cell to become cancerous.
In a **cancer cell** , the control processes that regulate cell growth
and division are not working properly. As a result, they grow and divide
rapidly, often interfering with the functioning of nearby healthy cells.
For example, over time internal radon exposure can lead to the
development of lung cancer. This is especially problematic for smokers,
who already have exposed their lungs to significant amounts of
carcinogens. Tissue damage is also common in people with severe exposure
to radiation.

## Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment {#24.html#x-ck12-UmFkaW9pc290b3BlcyBpbiBNZWRpY2FsIERpYWdub3NpcyBhbmQgVHJlYXRtZW50_3-wcd}

Radioisotopes are widely used to diagnose, and sometimes treat, various
diseases. For diagnosis, the isotope is administered to the patient and
then located in the body using a scanner of some sort. The source of the
decay product (often gamma emission) can be located by the scanner, and
a map of where the isotope was transported in the body can be generated.
This information is often very valuable for diagnosing certain medical
problems.

For example, a radioactive isotope of iodine (I-131) is used in both the
diagnosis and treatment of thyroid cancer. The thyroid will normally
absorb some iodine to produce iodine-containing thyroid hormones. An
overactive thyroid gland will absorb a larger amount of the radioactive
material. If this is the case, more and more radioactive iodine can be
administered, where it will cluster in the diseased portion of the
thyroid tissue and kill some of the nearby cells. Cancer treatments
often cause patients to feel very sick, because while the radiation
treatment kills the unwanted cancer cells, it causes damage to some
healthy cells in the process.

Technetium-99m is perhaps the most widely used radioisotope in diagnosis
and treatment (the “m” stands for metastable indicating a very short
half-life). This isotope decays to Tc-99 by gamma emission. If a very
low dose of the isotope is administered, the radiation will be of a very
low intensity, so cellular damage will be minimal. Additionally, gamma
radiation has a very high penetrating power, so most of it will reach
the detector in the scanner. The half-life of Tc-99m is about six hours,
so it will remain in the body for some time.

Tc-99m is often used to look at cardiac damage. If there is less blood
flow in the heart, there will be less of the isotope concentrated in the
heart muscle. Similar information can be obtained for blood flow in the
brain.

There are presently over 25 different isotopes in use for diagnosis and
medical treatment. A very partial list can be seen in **Table**
[below](#24.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6cmFkaW9pc290b3Blcw..) .

  Isotope   Half-Life   Application
  --------- ----------- ---------------------------------
  Cr-51     28 days     labeling red blood cells
  Fe-59     446 days    study iron metabolism in spleen
  Xe-133    5 days      study lung function
  Ho-166    26 hours    cancer treatment

## PET Scans {#24.html#x-ck12-UEVUIFNjYW5z_3-lef}

One of the more interesting and useful medical applications of
radioisotopes is positron emission tomography (PET), often referred to
as a **PET scan** . This technique is especially useful for studying
processes in the brain. Many compounds do not enter the brain because of
the blood-brain barrier, which is a particularly selective filter that
prevents many substances in the blood from being transported into brain
tissue.

In order to get a good picture of what is happening in the brain,
radiolabels (radioactive trackers) are attached to different compounds
that are known to enter the brain. Since the brain accounts for about
25% of the body's glucose consumption, this molecule is often labeled
with a positron emitter, such as F-18 (half-life of 109.8 minutes), to
study brain function in general. Other radiolabels are attached to
specific compounds that will localize in certain areas of the brain to
look at specific structures.

The PET scanner detects gamma emissions from the collision of a positron
with an electron. A positron has the same mass but opposite charge of an
electron. As the positron is released from the nucleus of the atom, it
will collide with an electron. This meeting of matter (electron) with
antimatter (positron) results in annihilation of both particles and the
release of two gamma photons that travel in exactly opposite directions.
The scanning apparatus detects these gamma rays and stores the data in a
computer. From this information, a detailed picture of the brain can be
developed.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-OWU1Zjc2Y2IxOTcyODVlN2E5NDQ1M2EyNDY4NmQ0Zjc.-qtd"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Zereshk/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PET1_RIC.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438440766.jpeg)

**Figure 24.14**

</div>

One useful application of PET scanning is in the diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s disease. This debilitating condition associated with memory
loss primarily occurs in elderly individuals. A protein known as
beta-amyloid gradually forms deposits, or plaques, in the brain. Severe
memory loss and impaired movement appear to be direct results of the
plaque growth.

The compound known as “Pittsburgh compound B” is often used to identify
areas of plaque in the brain. The C-11 atom bound to the nitrogen has a
half-life of just 20.38 minutes, so administration and detection must be
accomplished very quickly.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-NDQ0ZTNiMDE0Y2Y5NWZjODdmM2I4ZmI1NWZlYjY0Yzk.-ubq"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Edgar181/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pittsburgh_compound_B.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438567964.png)

**Figure 24.15**

</div>

The label attaches to plaques in the brain and can be observed using a
PET scanner.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MTc4NzExNmIyN2MzN2UzMzM3NDlmYzdlOTk1YTY3Njg.-n2q"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="The Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center, NIH" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PET_AD.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438689351.jpeg)

**Figure 24.16**

</div>

The computer translates the intensity of the decay from the radioactive
isotope into a color scale, with red indicating a high level of
radioactivity and yellow indicating somewhat less activity. We can see
from the scans that the cognitively healthy individual shows the
presence of very little plaque in the brain, whereas the individual with
Alzheimer’s has high concentrations of beta-amyloid in numerous areas of
the brain.

Other studies have used PET scans to look at certain regions of the
brain in drug addicts. One of the theories about drug addiction involves
activity related to the molecule dopamine, a chemical that helps carry
certain nerve impulses from one brain cell to the next. Studies on
dopamine activity in the brain have been helpful in understanding the
biochemical processes behind addiction.

<div
id="24.html#x-ck12-MThlZWI2OTgzYzEzNjA2NjdkNzBmMjE2ODI5MmU5M2U.-twh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Nora Volkow" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PET_-_Human_Addiction.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public domain" -->
![](ck12_24_files/20151009235438828199.jpeg)

**Figure 24.17**

</div>

**Figure** [above](#24.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjRfMjI.) shows the
accumulation of radioactive compounds that bind to dopamine receptors.
The non-addicted individuals have large numbers of receptors for
dopamine. The addicted persons show less binding to these receptors,
indicating that fewer receptors are present.

## Lesson Summary {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._3-uhf}

-   Everyone is exposed to low amounts of background radiation from
    medical procedures and naturally occurring radioactive substances.
-   Radioactive emissions can alter the structure of DNA, which can
    sometimes lead to cell death or even cancer.
-   Radioisotopes are widely used in medical diagnosis. These isotopes
    need to have short half-lives so that they can be administered in
    very low doses, thus minimizing damage to cells.
-   Radioactive isotopes are also used in the treatment of certain
    diseases, such as cancer. These isotopes are administered to only
    the diseased tissue, with the goal of destroying the
    unhealthy cells.
-   PET scans are very useful in looking at brain structure
    and chemistry.

## Lesson Review Questions {#24.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._3-hk9}

1.  How are radioactive materials harmful to cells?
2.  Why are cancer cells so detrimental in the body?
3.  Why should radioisotopes given to patients have short half-lives?
4.  Explain how the radioactive isotope of iodine is used to diagnose
    and treat thyroid cancer.
5.  How is Tc-99m used to diagnose bone cancer?
6.  Why is PET scanning so useful in studying the brain?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#24.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._3-3hx}

-   Radioisotopes in medicine:
    [http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/inf55.html](inf55.html)
-   Use of radioisotopes in diagnosis and treatment:
    [http://www.rsc.org/images/essay5\_tcm18-17767.pdf](essay5_tcm18-17767.pdf)
-   Positron emission tomography:
    [http://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/info.cfm?pg=pet](info.cfm?pg=pet)

## Points to Consider {#24.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_3-fih}

-   Can you think of any historical events in which people may have been
    exposed to dangerous amounts of radioactivity?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686179] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#24.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-nxo}

1.  Henri Becquerel.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Becquerel\_plate.jpg](File:Becquerel_plate.jpg) .
    Public Domain
2.  User:Inductiveload/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alpha\_Decay.svg](File:Alpha_Decay.svg) .
    Public Domain
3.  User:Inductiveload/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Beta-minus\_Decay.svg](File:Beta-minus_Decay.svg) .
    Public Domain
4.  User:Stannered/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alfa\_beta\_gamma\_radiation.svg](File:Alfa_beta_gamma_radiation.svg) .
    CC BY 2.5
5.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
6.  Pieter Kuiper.
    [https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Activity\_decay.svg](File:Activity_decay.svg) .
    Public Domain
7.  Courtesy of US Geological Survey.
    [http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2004/1050/uranium.htm](uranium.htm) .
    Public Domain
8.  User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nuclear\_fission.svg](File:Nuclear_fission.svg) .
    Public Domain
9.  User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fission\_chain\_reaction.svg](File:Fission_chain_reaction.svg) .
    Public Domain
10. Daniel Cardenas.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2008\_US\_electricity\_generation\_by\_source\_v2.png](File:2008_US_electricity_generation_by_source_v2.png) .
    CC BY 3.0
11. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, User:Andrew c, User:Stannered,
    and User:Wrleach/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tmi-2\_schematic\_revised.svg](File:Tmi-2_schematic_revised.svg) .
    Public Domain
12. User:Wykis.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Deuterium-tritium\_fusion.svg](File:Deuterium-tritium_fusion.svg) .
    Public Domain
13. Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
14. User:Zereshk/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PET1\_RIC.jpg](File:PET1_RIC.jpg) .
    Public Domain
15. User:Edgar181/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pittsburgh\_compound\_B.png](File:Pittsburgh_compound_B.png) .
    Public Domain
16. The Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center, NIH.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PET\_AD.jpg](File:PET_AD.jpg) .
    Public Domain
17. Nora Volkow.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PET\_-\_Human\_Addiction.jpg](File:PET_-_Human_Addiction.jpg) .
    Public domain

<span id="25.html"></span>

# Organic Chemistry {#25.html#x-ck12-T3JnYW5pYyBDaGVtaXN0cnk.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442074434.jpeg)
</span>

From the simple and pleasurable creation of a craft item, like the
necklace above, to the heavy-duty pipes that carry water and other
materials, polymers are an essential part of today’s society. Polymers
are very large molecules based on small structural units that are
repeated hundreds or even thousands of times. Most of these materials
are based on carbon chains, which puts them in the domain of organic
chemistry. However, polymers are but one application of modern organic
chemistry. The chemistry of carbon-containing compounds encompasses over
twenty million compounds and thousands of different reactions, many
named after the chemists who developed them. This chapter will give a
small sampling of the complex field of organic chemistry.

^Jana\\ Lehmann.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Buttons\_necklace.jpg.\\ CC\\ BY\\ 2.0.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686181] -->

# Hydrocarbons – The Backbone of Organic Chemistry {#25.html#x-ck12-SHlkcm9jYXJib25zIOKAkyBUaGUgQmFja2JvbmUgb2YgT3JnYW5pYyBDaGVtaXN0cnk.}

## Lesson Objectives {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-vcv}

-   Describe the bonding characteristics of carbon.
-   Differentiate between saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons.
-   Draw and name structures for simple hydrocarbons.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-kjz}

-   **organic chemistry** : A field of chemistry which studies the
    structure and reactivity and nearly all carbon-containing compounds.
-   **hydrocarbon** : Molecules that contain only carbon and
    hydrogen atoms.
-   **alkane** : Hydrocarbons in which all carbons are connected by
    single bonds.
-   **alkene** : A compound in which a C=C double bond is present.
-   **alkyne** : A compound in which a C≡C triple bond is present.
-   **saturated** : Hydrocarbons which contain no multiple bonds.
-   **unsaturated** : Hydrocarbons which contain at least one double or
    triple bond.

## Check Your Understanding {#25.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-z0y}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#25.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ..-w8o}

-   How many covalent bonds does each carbon atom in a molecule usually
    make?
-   How can the hybridization of a given carbon atom be determined?

## Introduction {#25.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u-tw2}

Before the 19th century, scientists had believed that the chemical
processes occurring in living systems were fundamentally different from
those that could be observed in a test tube. They classified chemistry
into two categories: organic and inorganic. Organic processes were
thought to take place only in living systems, while inorganic processes
occurred in material that was not living. A "vital force" was believed
to be necessary for organic reactions to occur. This way of thinking was
challenged in 1828 by the German chemist Friedrich Wöhler when he
synthesized an organic compound (urea, found in urine) from an inorganic
precursor (ammonium cyanate):

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MTQ0NDUyMGRhODExNWFmZGFkNzY5ZTRmYmY5YTc4ZGY.-dwr"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Leyo/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synthesis_of_urea.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442222686.png)

**Figure 25.1**

Reaction of ammonium cyanate to form urea.

</div>

Since then, the distinction between organic and inorganic compounds and
reactions has blurred. Currently, the field of **organic chemistry**
studies the structure and reactivity of nearly all carbon-containing
compounds. Over twenty million organic compounds are known, ranging from
very simple molecules to complex proteins.

## Bonding and Hybridization in Carbon {#25.html#x-ck12-Qm9uZGluZyBhbmQgSHlicmlkaXphdGlvbiBpbiBDYXJib24.-ujt}

Let’s briefly review the basics of covalent bonding as they pertain to
carbon. Carbon has four valence electrons, which have a 2s ^2^ 2p ^2^
configuration in isolated carbon atoms. These four electrons allow
carbon to form four covalent bonds, which can mean four single bonds or
some combination of single, double, and triple bonds.

A carbon atom that has formed single bonds to four different atoms has
an sp ^3^ hybridization. The angles between these bonds are equal to
109.5°.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NTA2ZTEyZTY2NzEzNDM4ZTNhYjBjYmQxNmJkOWQyNWM.-gn4"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442322875.jpeg)

**Figure 25.2**

Hybridization of the valence orbitals in a carbon atom to make a set of
four sp ^3^ orbitals.

</div>

Recall that a double bond consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond. In
order for a double bond to be formed, each participating carbon atom
must have at least one unhybridized p orbital. In a carbon-carbon double
bond where both carbons are bonded to two additional atoms, each carbon
is sp ^2^ hybridized. The double bond includes a sigma bond between a
hybrid orbital from each carbon and a pi bond between the leftover p
orbital from each carbon. The angles between any two bonds for an sp ^2^
hybridized carbon are approximately 120°.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MmUyNDQ1YjFjMjY2NmVmMDU3YjI1YWJkOTU0NWFmOWI.-2jq"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442442447.png)

**Figure 25.3**

Hybridization of the valence orbitals in a carbon atom to make a set of
three sp ^2^ orbitals, with one p orbital left over.

</div>

A triple bond (-C≡C-) requires each of the carbon atoms to be sp
hybridized. One hybrid orbital and two p orbitals from each atom are
involved in forming the one sigma and two pi bonds that make up a triple
bond. Each carbon atom is also bonded to one other atom via the other
hybrid orbital. The angle between these two bonds for an sp hybridized
carbon is 180°.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-N2VlN2FhYWRkOTlhNjY1ZTcxMWE3Mjk2ZmRkNTIyNjA.-gjm"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Zachary Wilson, using 3D model by Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation; 3D molecule: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetylene-CRC-IR-3D-vdW.png" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D model available under public domain)" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442563517.png)

**Figure 25.4**

Hybridization of the valence orbitals in a carbon atom to make a set of
two sp orbitals, with two p orbitals left over.

</div>

## Hydrocarbon Structure and Naming {#25.html#x-ck12-SHlkcm9jYXJib24gU3RydWN0dXJlIGFuZCBOYW1pbmc.-rfk}

**Hydrocarbons** are molecules that contain only carbon and hydrogen
atoms. Because each carbon atom can form covalent bonds with up to four
other atoms, very large and complex molecules can be formed just from
these two elements. Hydrocarbons in which all carbons are connected by
single bonds are known as **alkanes** . If a C=C double bond is present,
the compound is now an **alkene** . A triple bond between two carbons
(C≡C) makes the compound an **alkyne** . Hydrocarbons can also be
broadly classified as either **saturated** , which means they contain no
multiple bonds, or **unsaturated** , which means they contain at least
one double or triple bond.

The simplest alkanes are linear chains of carbon atoms, in which no
carbon is bonded to more than two other carbon atoms. Branched alkanes
are also possible, greatly increasing the complexity of possible
structures that can be formed from a given set of carbon and hydrogen
atoms. The first six linear alkanes are listed in the **Table**
[below](#25.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6MjQuMQ..) .

  Structure                                   Name
  ------------------------------------------- ---------
  CH ~4~                                      methane
  CH ~3~ CH ~3~                               ethane
  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~                        propane
  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~                 butane
  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~          pentane
  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~   hexane

Starting with pentane, linear alkanes are named by adding "-ane" to the
Latin prefix corresponding to the number of carbon atoms in the chain.

Since organic chemistry is essentially carbon chemistry, it is important
to understand the structure of the hydrocarbon chain. Although alkanes
are relatively unreactive, they provide the backbone for more reactive
structures known as functional groups, which we will discuss in the
following lesson. Most organic reactions will alter only specific
functional groups, while the hydrocarbon backbone is generally left
intact.

### Drawing Organic Structures {#25.html#x-ck12-RHJhd2luZyBPcmdhbmljIFN0cnVjdHVyZXM.-sy2}

We can indicate hydrocarbon structures in several ways. The entire
structure of hexane is shown in the **Figure**
[below](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMDYtSGV4YW5l) using the usual rules
for drawing Lewis structures. Each atom is indicated with the symbol of
its element, and each single covalent bond is represented with a line.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NmQxNGMyNmI0YjI0ODI0MTVmNDFkYWU5NmVjOGUxZTQ.-snv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Martin Walker (User:Walkerma/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HexaneFull.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442633472.png)

**Figure 25.5**

Hexane structure, with all atoms shown.

</div>

However, this type of structure is time consuming to draw and can become
very cluttered. Because carbons and hydrogen atoms are so prevalent in
organic molecules, a chemical shorthand was developed so that not all
atoms need to be explicitly drawn. **Figure**
[below](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMDctSGV4YW5lLVNrZWxldG9u) is another
way to draw the hexane molecule:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MjY3MmQ2MWM5NGQ1ODdlZjI1NWE1NTliZDQ1YmU3Mzc.-n1z"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joel Holdsworth" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442769280.png)

**Figure 25.6**

Skeleton structure for hexane.

</div>

In the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMDctSGV4YW5lLVNrZWxldG9u) , the two
ends of the chain and each of the intervening corners represents a
carbon atom. The six carbon atoms are connected in a linear chain by
single bonds. Unless indicated otherwise, we also assume that each
carbon makes four total bonds, and any bonds that are not explicitly
drawn are connected to hydrogen atoms. The internal carbon atoms above
each make single bonds to two other carbons, leaving two bonds not
shown. Thus, each of these carbon atoms is connected to two hydrogens.
The carbons on the ends of the chain only have one covalent bond drawn
in, so they must each be bonded to three hydrogen atoms. Compare these
two representations of hexane, keeping in mind that both are conveying
the same information.

### Locating Functional Groups {#25.html#x-ck12-TG9jYXRpbmcgRnVuY3Rpb25hbCBHcm91cHM.-lgn}

Most organic compounds are not simple hydrocarbons; they have functional
groups that provide additional reactivity pathways. To indicate the
location of a functional group within the name of an organic molecule,
the hydrocarbon backbone is generally numbered. For example, the hexane
molecule (see **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMDYtSGV4YW5l) ) could serve as a
parent chain. It has six carbons in it, which can be numbered C-1, C-2,
and so on. As long as there is nothing else attached to the chain, it
does not matter where we start counting. There is no way to designate
which carbon is C-1 and which carbon is C-6. However, once a substituent
is added to the chain, we can then indicate a start and an end to the
molecule.

Now, let's introduce a functional group by replacing one of the hydrogen
atoms in hexane with a chlorine atom:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjkyZTEzOThkMTliNzQxOGYwMjQ2OTY4NzU1MWZiNDE.-u96"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joel Holdsworth" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235442895847.png)

**Figure 25.7**

2-Chlorohexane

</div>

To indicate that this molecule has a chlorine atom attached to the
hydrocarbon backbone, we could name this compound *chloro* hexane.
However, that name would not be enough information to uniquely identify
this molecule, since the chlorine could be attached to any of the carbon
atoms. To indicate the location of this substituent, we number the
chain, starting with the end that will place the functional group on the
carbon atom with the lowest number. Depending on which end is C-1, the
compound in the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMDgtQ2hsb3JvaGV4YW5l) could be
called either 2-chlorohexane or 5-chlorohexane. According to our rule
about giving functional groups the lowest possible numbers, this
molecule would be called 2-chlorohexane.

Other alkanes with a single halogen atom can be named using a similar
strategy, except chloro would be replaced by fluoro, bromo, or iodo,
depending on the identity of the halogen.

The location of double and triple bonds must also be indicated with
numbers. For example, consider the following two molecules: CH ~3~ CH
~2~ CH=CHCH ~3~ and CH ~2~ =CHCH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~ . Both of these have
one double bond. A simple 5-carbon alkane (no double bonds) would be
called pentane, so adding in one double bond changes the name of the
structure to pent *ene* , since it is an alk *ene* . However, the
location of the double bond affects the physical and chemical properties
of the compound.

In order to distinguish between the two molecules above, we again number
the carbon chain, starting from the end that will give the functional
group (the alkene) the lowest number. For CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH=CHCH ~3~ , we
would start counting on the right end. The double bond is between carbon
atoms 2 and 3, so this molecule would be named pent-2-ene, where the
lower of the two numbers is used. For CH ~2~ =CHCH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~ ,
we would start counting on the left end. The double bond is between
carbon atoms 1 and 2, so this molecule would be named pent-1-ene.

Triple bonds can be identified in a similar way, except that the suffix
*-yne* is used instead of *-ene* (to indicate that we are dealing with
an alk *yne* instead of an alk *ene* ).

### Cyclic Hydrocarbons {#25.html#x-ck12-Q3ljbGljIEh5ZHJvY2FyYm9ucw..-095}

Many organic compounds are cyclic in structure. The compound cyclohexane
involves a ring of six carbon atoms, each of which is also bonded to two
hydrogen atoms. **Figure**
[below](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMDktQ3ljbG9oZXhhbmU.) shows a few
different representations of the cyclohexane molecule.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MWYzYWFjMWRiNmY4NzQ0ZmJiNGI5NGJhMzY1YzRkNzQ.-jla"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Calvero/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443040354.png)

**Figure 25.8**

Ways of representing the structure of cyclohexane.

</div>

The structure on the right gives the complete picture, where all atoms
are explicitly drawn. The middle structure shows a flat representation
of the molecule based on the standard shorthand rules for drawing
organic structures. The folded structure on the left highlights an
important point about organic chemistry – the three-dimensional
structure of a molecule is not always portrayed accurately by flat
drawings. The true structure of the cyclohexane molecule has a puckered
shape that looks more like the structure on the left than the flat
hexagon in the center. The preferred three-dimensional conformations of
organic molecules often play an important role in how the molecule
reacts. The following structures illustrate some of the interesting and
complex shapes organic molecules can take on:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NzM1OGNlNjViM2NjYzUxYWUzOGM1M2I1ZDE1YTc2ZGI.-p0n"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diels-Alder_endo_exo.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443146923.png)

**Figure 25.9**

Complex organic structures.

</div>

Aromatic hydrocarbons are a special subset of cyclic hydrocarbons.
Although many "aromatic" compounds have distinctive odors, this word is
used very differently in organic chemistry than in everyday life. The
benzene ring is the foundational structure for most aromatic compounds:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-ZjEwNWM0NjM5YzgzNDc5OGVhZTNjYTMzN2JjZWI0OGY.-urc"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons; User:Bryan Derksen/Wikimedia Commons; User:Edgar181/Wikimedia Commons, derivative work: User:Rodolopezdato/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benzene-3D-vdW.png; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benzene_both.svg; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benzene-resonance-structures.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443253537.png)

**Figure 25.10**

Ways to represent benzene ring.

</div>

The illustrations in the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMTEtQmVuemVuZQ..) give different
perspectives on the actual structure of the molecule. The left-hand
illustration shows the six hydrogen atoms attached to the six carbons
and indicates that there are three double bonds in the ring, while the
next structure shows this symbolically. A more realistic picture is
given by the next two models. The circle shows the reality of the
bonding. The three pi bonds in the ring overlap one another and form a
cloud of electrons above and below the plane of the ring. Benzene and
its derivatives do not undergo the same reactions as most carbon-carbon
double bonds, due to the special stability that is inherent in this type
of interactive pi bonding.

## Lesson Summary {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-s0n}

-   Hydrocarbons contain only carbon and hydrogen.
-   Alkanes contain only carbon-carbon single bonds.
-   Alkenes contain one or more carbon-carbon double bonds.
-   Alkynes contain one or more carbon-carbon triple bonds.
-   Chemists use a shorthand for drawing organic structures that focuses
    on functional groups and simplifies the drawing of the
    hydrocarbon backbone.
-   Many hydrocarbons are cyclic and adopt specific three-dimensional
    structures that influence their physical and chemical properties.
-   Aromatic compounds are cyclic and have a cloud of pi electrons above
    and below the plane of the ring.

## Lesson Review Questions {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-rts}

1.  What is a hydrocarbon?
2.  Classify the following hydrocarbons as saturated or unsaturated, and
    identify each as an alkane, alkene, or alkyne:
    1.  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH ~2~ CH ~3~
    2.  CH ~3~ CH=CHCH ~2~ CH ~3~
    3.  CH ~3~ C≡CH

3.  Name each of the compounds in the previous problem.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#25.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-21z}

-   Overview of organic chemistry:
    [http://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/careers/whatchemistsdo/careers/organic-chemistry.html](organic-chemistry.html)
-   Organic chemistry nomenclature:
    [http://www2.chemistry.msu.edu/faculty/reusch/VirtTxtJml/nomen1.htm](nomen1.htm)
-   Hydrocarbons:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/1organic/hydro.html](hydro.html)

## Points to Consider {#25.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy-saw}

-   Is there a systematic way to classify organic compounds?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686181] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686182] -->

# Functional Groups {#25.html#x-ck12-RnVuY3Rpb25hbCBHcm91cHM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-3fu}

-   Describe the importance of functional groups in organic reactions.
-   Identify and name functional groups in compounds.
-   Draw structures of functional groups.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-l98}

-   **functional group** : An atom or group of atoms within a molecule
    that has similar chemical properties whenever it appears in
    various compounds.
-   **alcohol** : A functional group that involves an oxygen atom that
    is bonded to one hydrogen atom and one carbon atom.
-   **ether** : A functional group that consists of an oxygen atom that
    forms single bonds with two carbon atoms.
-   **amine** : A nitrogen atom bonded to some combination of carbons
    and hydrogens.
-   **carbonyl** : A carbon atom and an oxygen atom connected by a
    double bond.
-   **aldehyde** : A carbonyl in which the carbon atom is most commonly
    bonded to one carbon atom and one hydrogen atom.
-   **ketone** : A carbonyl in which the carbon atom makes single bonds
    with two other carbon atoms.
-   **carboxylic acid** : A functional group in which the carbon atom is
    bonded to an OH group on one side and either a carbon or hydrogen
    atom on the other.
-   **ester** : A functional group in which the carbon is bonded to one
    additional oxygen atom and one carbon or hydrogen atom, with the
    second oxygen atom bonded to another carbon atom.
-   **amide** : A carbonyl which is attached to one nitrogen atom and
    one carbon or hydrogen atom.

## Check Your Understanding {#25.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-xya}

-   What is organic chemistry?
-   What serves as the framework for all organic compounds?

## Introduction {#25.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_1-v9d}

With over twenty million known organic compounds in existence, it would
be very challenging to memorize chemical reactions for each one.
Fortunately, molecules with similar functional groups tend to undergo
similar reactions. A **functional group** is defined as an atom or group
of atoms within a molecule that has similar chemical properties whenever
it appears in various compounds. Even if other parts of the molecule are
quite different, certain functional groups tend to react in certain
ways.

In the previous lesson, we already looked at two common functional
groups: alkenes and alkynes. Although C-C and C-H single bonds are
relatively unreactive, the pi bonds in alkenes and alkynes undergo a
variety of characteristic reactions. We will look at some of these
reactions in the next lesson. The majority of functional groups involve
atoms other than carbon and hydrogen. Some of the most common functional
groups are presented in the following sections.

## Alcohols {#25.html#x-ck12-QWxjb2hvbHM._1-cnu}

The **alcohol** functional group involves an oxygen atom that is bonded
to one hydrogen atom and one carbon atom. The carbon atom will be part
of a larger organic structure. One way to indicate a generic alcohol
would be with the formula R-OH. R represents any organic fragment in
which a carbon atom is directly bonded to the explicitly indicated
functional group (in this case, OH).

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-YWQ1ZGJiY2UyNDMwYjMxNDQ0NzcwYmUxNDhkNDM4ZTE.-vlp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Christopher Auyeung" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443364180.png)

**Figure 25.11**

</div>

Alcohols can be classified as primary, secondary, or tertiary based on
the characteristics of the carbon to which it is attached. In a primary
alcohol, the carbon bonded directly to the oxygen atom is also bonded to
exactly one carbon atom, with the other bonds generally going to
hydrogen atoms. In a secondary alcohol, the carbon is attached to two
other carbon atoms, and in a tertiary alcohol, the carbon is bonded to
three other carbon atoms. The type of alcohol being used will determine
the product of certain reactions. Note the naming of alcohols as
illustrated in the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMTItQWxjb2hvbHM.) . The location of
the –OH group is indicated with the number of the carbon to which it is
attached.

We are already familiar with several common alcohols. For example,
ethanol (CH ~3~ CH ~2~ OH) is the alcohol present in alcoholic
beverages. It is also widely used in the industrial manufacture of other
chemicals. Methanol (CH ~3~ OH) is used as a gasoline additive or
alternative. Additionally, methanol can be used to manufacture
formaldehyde, which is employed in the production of plastics, paints,
and other useful substances. Isopropanol is commonly known as rubbing
alcohol. In addition to its industrial uses, isopropanol is used to
clean various surfaces, including computer monitors, whiteboards, and
even skin (e.g., before getting blood drawn).

## Ethers {#25.html#x-ck12-RXRoZXJz_1-qvu}

The **ether** functional group consists of an oxygen atom that forms
single bonds with two carbon atoms.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NTdkNzViZjg3OWJkNzc0OGI5OTcyNGI4NDY0NWUzYjM.-xp4"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Peter Lai" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443488685.png)

**Figure 25.12**

</div>

Ethers are good solvents for other organic compounds because of their
low reactivity. They readily dissolve non-polar molecules. Diethyl ether
is perhaps the best known ether. It is widely used as a solvent and has
been used as an inhalable anesthetic.

Although ethers themselves are relatively unreactive, they can be
converted to peroxides after prolonged exposure to oxygen. Peroxides are
very reactive and are often explosive at elevated temperatures. Many
commercially available ethers come with a small amount of a peroxide
scavenger dissolved in them to help prevent this type of safety hazard.

## Amines {#25.html#x-ck12-QW1pbmVz_1-j74}

An **amine** consists of a nitrogen atom bonded to some combination of
carbons and hydrogens.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-YWM3ZDJkOGY5ODlkZTAwM2NhMGVjY2Q0MjI2Y2EwZjk.-jqp"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Kes47/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="Primary: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Primary-amine-2D-general.svg; Secondary: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Secondary-amine-2D-general.svg; Tertiary: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amine-2D-general.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443613124.png)

**Figure 25.13**

</div>

Like alcohols, amines can be classified as primary, secondary, or
tertiary. However, the rules for assigning these categories are slightly
different. In an alcohol, the oxygen atom is always bonded to exactly
one carbon atom, so we look at the branching on the adjacent carbon, not
the oxygen atom itself. In a neutral amine, the nitrogen can be bonded
to one, two, or three carbon atoms, and this is how we decide whether it
is called a primary, secondary, or tertiary amine.

Neutral amines are weak bases, because the lone pair on nitrogen can act
as a proton acceptor. Many smaller amines have very strong and offensive
odors. For example, the aptly-named compounds cadaverine and putrescine
are foul-smelling amines, formed as a part of the decay process after
death.

Amines serve a wide variety of uses. Diphenylamine acts as a stabilizer
for certain types of explosives. Amines are found as components in some
lubricating materials, in developers, and are a part of waterproofing
textiles. Some amines, such as novocaine, are used as anesthetics. Many
pharmaceutical compounds contain amines, including 8 of the 10 most
prescribed medications in 2012.

## Aldehydes {#25.html#x-ck12-QWxkZWh5ZGVz_1-ahm}

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjQzMmJkZjBlOTA4YWZlMWIwODVlN2FjODUzM2Y3NjM.-7jf"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443729403.png)

**Figure 25.14**

</div>

A very common structural component of organic structures is the
**carbonyl** , which is simply a carbon atom and an oxygen atom
connected by a double bond. The reactivity of carbonyls is primarily
dictated by the polarization of the C=O bond, but the surrounding atoms
also play a role in its specific reaction pathways. All of the remaining
functional groups that we will be discussing contain a carbonyl, but
they have different properties based on the other atoms that are also
connected to the central carbon.

An **aldehyde** is a carbonyl in which the carbon atom is bonded to one
carbon atom and one hydrogen atom (or two hydrogen atoms, see below).
Because the hydrogen atom is so small, the partial positive charge on
the carbonyl carbon is very easy for other molecules to approach, making
aldehydes a particularly reactive type of carbonyl. Aldehydes are
versatile reactants for a wide variety of organic syntheses. Many
aldehydes also have distinctive flavors and aromas. For example, the
flavor of cinnamon is primarily due to the molecule cinnamaldehyde, and
vanillin is the aldehyde most responsible for the smell and taste of
vanilla extract.

A special aldehyde is the molecule in which the carbonyl carbon is
bonded to two hydrogen atoms. This molecule, called formaldehyde, has a
wide variety of uses. By itself, it can be used as a tissue preservative
or as a very harsh disinfectant. It is also used as a precursor to
various materials, including plastics, resins, and other polymers.

## Ketones {#25.html#x-ck12-S2V0b25lcw.._1-v7l}

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjQzMmJkZjBlOTA4YWZlMWIwODVlN2FjODUzM2Y3NjM.-anw"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235443879107.png)

**Figure 25.15**

</div>

A **ketone** involves a carbonyl in which the carbon atom makes single
bonds with two other carbon atoms. Ketones undergo most of the same
reactions as aldehydes, but they tend to be slightly less reactive. The
simplest ketone is acetone, in which the carbonyl carbon is bonded to
two CH ~3~ groups. This ketone is commonly used to remove fingernail
polish and serves as an industrial solvent. Methyl ethyl ketone is used
as a paint stripper and a solvent. Ketones are also used in the
production of various polymers, either as a building block or as a
solvent.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NTdkNzViZjg3OWJkNzc0OGI5OTcyNGI4NDY0NWUzYjM.-wlt"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Peter Lai" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444002945.png)

**Figure 25.16**

</div>

## Carboxylic Acids {#25.html#x-ck12-Q2FyYm94eWxpYyBBY2lkcw.._1-xu1}

**Carboxylic acids** are another carbonyl-containing functional group,
in which the carbon atom is bonded to an OH group on one side and either
a carbon or hydrogen atom on the other.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjQzMmJkZjBlOTA4YWZlMWIwODVlN2FjODUzM2Y3NjM.-afu"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444112622.png)

**Figure 25.17**

</div>

The OH group in an alcohol is not a very good acid; simple alcohols are
similar in acidity to water. However, as the name implies, carboxylic
acids are weak acids. An OH group that is directly connected to a
carbonyl will ionize to a small extent when dissolved in water. The
reason for this is the relative stability of the resulting anion. A
carboxylate ion ( **Figure**
[below](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMTgtQ2FyYm94eWxhdGU.) ), in which
the negative charge is spread over two different oxygen atoms through
resonance structures, is more stable than an isolated oxygen-centered
anion.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NTdkNzViZjg3OWJkNzc0OGI5OTcyNGI4NDY0NWUzYjM.-ucn"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Peter Lai" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444234545.png)

**Figure 25.18**

</div>

Carboxylic acids are used in a variety of environments. Formic acid acts
as a protective chemical for many stinging insects and plants. Acetic
acid gives vinegar its characteristic smell and flavor and is a
fundamental biological and industrial building block. Carboxylic acids
with longer carbon chains (fatty acids) are used by animals as a way of
storing energy and are widely used in the manufacture of soaps. Some
compounds contain multiple carboxylic acids within a single molecule.
For example, citric acid (three carboxyl groups) is especially abundant
in citrus fruits and is used as a flavoring and preservative in many
foods and beverages.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NTdkNzViZjg3OWJkNzc0OGI5OTcyNGI4NDY0NWUzYjM.-57b"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Peter Lai" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444421800.png)

**Figure 25.19**

</div>

## Esters {#25.html#x-ck12-RXN0ZXJz_1-yzk}

An **ester** is similar to a carboxylic acid, in that it contains a
carbonyl where the carbon is bonded to one additional oxygen atom and
one carbon or hydrogen atom. However, the second oxygen atom is bonded
to another carbon instead of to an acidic hydrogen atom. Structurally,
carboxylic acids and esters are related to one another in the same way
as alcohols and ethers.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjQzMmJkZjBlOTA4YWZlMWIwODVlN2FjODUzM2Y3NjM.-npk"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444537657.png)

**Figure 25.20**

</div>

Esters can be formed by heating carboxylic acids and alcohols in the
presence of an acid catalyst. This process is reversible, and the
starting materials can be regenerated by reacting an ester with water in
the presence of a weak base.

Some esters have very pleasant odors, so they are used in the
manufacture of many perfumes. Propyl acetate contributes to the odor of
pears, while isoamyl acetate gives bananas their smell. This ester also
serves as an alarm signal for honeybees. Esters are employed in the
manufacture of fabrics (polyesters) and Plexiglass®. Anesthetics such as
procaine and benzocaine also contain esters.

## Amides {#25.html#x-ck12-QW1pZGVz_1-nbl}

An **amide** is a carbonyl in which the carbonyl is attached to one
nitrogen atom and one carbon or hydrogen atom. Alternatively, we could
define an amide as an amine in which one of the carbon atoms attached to
the nitrogen is part of a carbonyl.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjQzMmJkZjBlOTA4YWZlMWIwODVlN2FjODUzM2Y3NjM.-af2"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444667503.png)

**Figure 25.21**

</div>

An amide can be formed by combining a carboxylic acid and an amine. Only
primary and secondary amines can be used to form amides, since they have
a hydrogen that can be replaced with the carbonyl carbon; tertiary
amines will not form amides. The amide shown in the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMjItQW1pZGU.) was formed from a
carboxylic acid and a primary amine.

Amides are used as coloring agents in crayons, pencils, and ink. They
are employed in the paper, plastic, and rubber industries.
Polyacrylamide is a very widely used amide; it is involved in the
treatment of drinking water and sewage, and in plastics manufacture. The
amide Kevlar® is widely employed for the production of body armor, and
nylon is another type of amide-based polymer.

## Lesson Summary {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-wez}

-   Functional groups retain similar chemical properties in a variety
    of compounds. Functional groups help to distinguish organic
    molecules from one another.
-   Alcohols consist of an -OH group and commonly appear in the form of
    ethanol (in alcoholic beverages) and methanol (used in plastic and
    paint ingredients).
-   Ethers are composed of an oxygen atom that forms single bonds with
    two carbon atoms. Ethers are relatively unreactive making them good
    solvents for other organic compounds, such as in the formation
    of anesthetics.
-   Amines are composed of a nitrogen atom bonded to some combination of
    carbons and hydrogens. Amines are weak bases commonly used
    in pharmaceuticals.
-   Carbonyl is composed of a carbon atom double bonded with an oxygen
    atom, and is a common structural component of many other
    organic molecules. The reactivity of carbonyl derivatives is largely
    due to the polarity of the carbon-oxygen double bond.
-   Aldehydes are commonly composed of a carbon bonded to one carbon
    atom and one hydrogen atom. Aldehydes are particularly reactive due
    to their high polarity, and are commonly associated with strong
    smells and tastes.
-   Ketones are carbonyls in which the carbon atom makes single bonds
    with two other carbon atoms. Ketones are less reactive than
    aldehydes and are a common component in nail polish removers and
    paint strippers.
-   Carboxylic acid is a carbonyl in which in which the carbon atom is
    bonded to an OH group on one side and either a carbon or hydrogen
    atom on the other. Carboxylic acids are weak acids, for
    example, vinegar.
-   Esters are similar to carboxylic acids but contain a second oxygen
    rather than the acidic hydrogen that is in a carboxylic acid. Esters
    create the pleasant aroma associated with many fruits and flowers.
-   Amides are carbonyls attached to one nitrogen atom and one carbon or
    hydrogen atom. Amides are used in materials such as crayons and
    inks, as well as in paper rubber products.

## Lesson Review Questions {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-laf}

1.  Draw structures for the following functional groups:
    1.  ether
    2.  ester
    3.  ketone
    4.  alkene

2.  Name the following functional groups (in color):

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444814907.png)
</span>

3.  Designate the following alcohols as primary, secondary, or tertiary:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_25_files/20151009235444928194.png)
</span>

4.  Designate the following amines as primary, secondary, or tertiary:

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445036416.png)
</span>

## Further Reading/Supplementary Tasks {#25.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgVGFza3M._1-u1y}

-   Table of functional groups and reactions:
    [http://academic.pgcc.edu/\~ssinex/MolVis/FuncGroups.pdf](FuncGroups.pdf)
-   Functional group practice:
    [http://chemed.chem.purdue.edu/genchem/topicreview/bp/2organic/function.html](function.html)
-   Video about functional groups:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5ZK6nPPAbo](watch?v=C5ZK6nPPAbo)

## Points to Consider {#25.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_1-rzs}

How to different functional groups react in organic molecules?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686182] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686183] -->

# Organic Reactions {#25.html#x-ck12-T3JnYW5pYyBSZWFjdGlvbnM.}

## Lesson Objectives {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-0ii}

-   Be able to write reactions for:
    -   Hydrogenation of an alkene or alkyne.
    -   Halogenation of an alkene.
    -   Dehydrohalogenation of an alkene.
    -   Dehydration of an alcohol.
    -   Oxidation of an alcohol.
    -   Ester synthesis and hydrolysis.
    -   Amide synthesis and hydrolysis.
    -   Addition reactions leading to the formation of polymers.
    -   Condensation reactions leading to the formation of polymers.
-   Be able to list some common polymers and describe their uses.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-dw5}

-   **dehydration** : A type of elimination reaction that involves the
    loss of a water molecule.
-   **dehydrohalogenation** : A reaction between an alkyl halide and an
    alcoholic alkali resulting in an alkene.
-   **halogenation** : A reaction in which one or more of the hydrogen
    atoms in an organic compound is replaced by a halogen.
-   **hydrogenation** : A reaction in which a hydrogen atom is added to
    a molecule, yielding a saturated compound when added to an
    organic molecule.
-   **hydrolysis** : A type of decomposition reaction in which water is
    used to break chemical bonds, often the formation of an acid or a
    base from a salt and water.
-   **monomer** : A chemical structure that represents building blocks
    used to construct more complex compounds.
-   **polymer** : A chemical structure built from a number of
    combined monomers.

## Check Your Understanding {#25.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-c2r}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#25.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._2-usk}

-   Which parts of an organic molecule are considered functional groups,
    and why?

## Introduction {#25.html#x-ck12-SW50cm9kdWN0aW9u_2-jjk}

With over twenty million organic compounds to keep track of, we need
some way to organize information other than simply memorizing reactions
for each substance. The presence of functional groups allows us to group
together similar modes of chemical reactivity. Instead of learning the
reactions that can be performed with a given compound, we learn the
reactions that can be performed on a given functional group. Although
there are always special cases, specific sets of reaction conditions
tend to cause the same changes to a certain functional group regardless
of what the rest of the reactant molecule looks like.

Although there are thousands of different types of organic reactions,
many of the more complex ones can be broken down and understood in terms
of simpler processes, such as addition, elimination, and substitution
reactions. We will look at a small sampling of the most common processes
that occur during organic reactions. In each case, we will focus on how
one functional group is changed into another under a certain set of
conditions.

## Additions Across a Double Bond {#25.html#x-ck12-QWRkaXRpb25zIEFjcm9zcyBhIERvdWJsZSBCb25k_2-kyq}

There are two types of double bonds we will look at in terms of
reactions, the C=C double bond and the C=O double bond. Because one of
these bonds is polarized and the other is not, they differ quite a bit
in terms of the conditions under which they are reactive. However, the
overall change from reactant to product has the same form in either
case; the double bond becomes a single bond, and a new atom or group of
atoms is attached to each of the two atoms originally involved in the
double bond.

### Addition of Hydrogen {#25.html#x-ck12-QWRkaXRpb24gb2YgSHlkcm9nZW4._2-wxi}

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjQ5ZDhhYWY4MjkzMTAwZDU4ODEyMWNjMzg1Njk1NGE.-bqg"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:McMonster/Wikimedia Commons; User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethene_structural.svg, http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethane-flat.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445140463.png)

**Figure 25.22**

</div>

**Hydrogenation** is a very common addition reaction that involves the
net addition of H ~2~ across a double bond. Although the actual reaction
mechanism for such a process can be quite complicated, the overall
transformation is relatively simple. Each atom involved in the double
bond is attached to a new hydrogen atom, and the double bond becomes a
single bond.

For alkenes and alkynes (unpolarized multiple bonds), this process is
generally accomplished by mixing the starting material and H ~2~ gas in
the presence of a metal catalyst (often Pt or Pd, although some cheaper
metals can also be effective under certain conditions). An alkene can
combine with one equivalent of H ~2~ gas to form an unfunctionalized
alkane. Similarly, an alkyne can combine with two equivalents of H ~2~
(one for each pi bond) to make an alkane.

C=O bonds can also undergo a net addition of H ~2~ , but the reactants
are often quite different. In fact, many conditions for adding hydrogen
to an alkene will not affect a C=O bond at all, and vice versa.
Complementary reactivity patterns like this allow chemists to
selectively change one portion of a molecule without altering the rest.

In our chapter on *Oxidation-Reduction Reactions* , we learned that one
definition of reduction is the addition of hydrogen atoms. The addition
of H ~2~ across a double bond is an example of this type of reduction
reaction.

### Addition of Halogens {#25.html#x-ck12-QWRkaXRpb24gb2YgSGFsb2dlbnM._2-ttc}

**Halogenation** is analogous to hydrogenation, except that instead of
adding a hydrogen atom to each side of the double bond, we add a halogen
atom instead. In **Figure**
[below](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMjctSGFsb2dlbi1BZGRpdGlvbg..) , we
see that adding molecular bromine to an alkene results in the formation
of a dibrominated product. Unlike hydrogenation, no catalyst is required
for this reaction to occur. Again, using these same conditions on a C=O
double bond will *not* produce the analogous addition product due to the
different reactivity of these two functional groups.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-N2JjNDIyNTZmZGE5OTViNjJiYzM0MjM2Mzg4YTQ2YTU.-saf"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Eschenmoser/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stereo-Add-Brom-Alken.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445308308.png)

**Figure 25.23**

Halogenation of an alkene.

</div>

## Formation of Double Bonds {#25.html#x-ck12-Rm9ybWF0aW9uIG9mIERvdWJsZSBCb25kcw.._2-plt}

### Formation of C=C bonds {#25.html#x-ck12-Rm9ybWF0aW9uIG9mIEM9QyBib25kcw.._2-aqv}

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-OTk4ZGZkN2MxM2RjYTRiNzE4YWUzOGYzMzA4ZjdlMjQ.-sq6"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Pete Davis" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synthesis_of_alkenes_-_Dehydrohalogenation.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445454484.png)

**Figure 25.24**

**Dehydrohalogenation** of an alkane.

</div>

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MTMyYmVmNTUyNmY1ODkwN2RkMzI5MWNkMjE3Nzg3YzQ.-ffw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Pete Davis" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synthesis_of_alkenes_-_Dehydration_of_alcohol.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445584226.png)

**Figure 25.25**

**Dehydration** of an alcohol.

</div>

### Formation of C=O bonds {#25.html#x-ck12-Rm9ybWF0aW9uIG9mIEM9TyBib25kcw.._2-1s4}

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NjE4MzRjY2IyNTllOWU2ZWNhM2U3MTU0MmIxNTJlZjc.-5lg"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:ChVA/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Reaction_of_production_of_formic_with_methanol_oxidation.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445722936.png)

**Figure 25.26**

Oxidation of a primary alcohol.

</div>

Recall that one definition of oxidation is the loss of hydrogen atoms.
Oxidation of a primary alcohol will first lead to the formation of an
aldehyde. This process is the net removal of H ~2~ (one from oxygen and
one from carbon), leaving behind a double bond. In other words, this
oxidation is the opposite of the hydrogenation (reduction) reaction that
we looked at previously. If water is present, or if we use a strong
enough oxidizing agent, the aldehyde will be further oxidized to the
carboxylic acid. This fits with the idea that some oxidation reactions
involve the literal addition of oxygen atoms to the molecule.

A secondary alcohol forms a ketone when oxidized. The secondary alcohol
cannot be further oxidized to produce a carboxylic acid. Tertiary
alcohols cannot be oxidized in this way, because the carbon atom bonded
to the OH group is not also bonded to any hydrogens.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-ODA3ODRiNjY0YTI1Yjg4MDgzZTE5ZDUyOTgzYjdmMTI.-lj1"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445854721.png)

**Figure 25.27**

Oxidation of a secondary alcohol.

</div>

## Formation and Hydrolysis of Carboxylic Acid Derivatives {#25.html#x-ck12-Rm9ybWF0aW9uIGFuZCBIeWRyb2x5c2lzIG9mIENhcmJveHlsaWMgQWNpZCBEZXJpdmF0aXZlcw.._2-bts}

### Esters {#25.html#x-ck12-RXN0ZXJz_2-k8o}

In the presence of a strong acid catalyst, such as sulfuric acid, an
alcohol and a carboxylic acid can combine to form an ester and water.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-ZTI4OGM1ZGRlNzYxNWJmNGVlMWNjN2NhZTVlNThkMjg.-aft"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ester-from-acid-and-alcohol-2D-skeletal.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235445976381.png)

**Figure 25.28**

Ester formation from a carboxylic acid and an alcohol.

</div>

This reaction is reversible. The reverse reaction, in which water adds
to an ester in order to form an acid and an alcohol, is referred to as
**hydrolysis** of the ester. Because the reverse reaction happens so
readily, we need to manipulate this equilibrium in order to achieve a
high yield of the ester product. For example, if we increase the amount
of one of the starting materials, the reaction will be shifted in the
direction of ester formation according to Le Chatelier's Principle.
Usually, the less expensive starting material would be used in excess.

Conversely, we can also remove one of the products (generally water) in
order to drive the reaction forward. If the reaction is run above the
boiling point of water, the H ~2~ O product will leave the system as a
gas, shifting the equilibrium to the right. Chemical drying agents also
provide ways to remove water from active participation in the
equilibrium.

### Amides {#25.html#x-ck12-QW1pZGVz_2-sib}

A similar reaction can occur between a carboxylic acid and an amine (
**Figure** [below](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMzQtQW1pZGUtRm9ybWF0aW9u)
).

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MjdjOTYwYzdjOTI2M2E2Yzg4MDJkMzg2YTFkYjA1NjQ.-ngx"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amidbildung.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446093153.png)

**Figure 25.29**

Amide synthesis.

</div>

We can see from the diagram that the –OH of the carboxyl group and a
hydrogen from the amine form water as a byproduct. The nitrogen will
attach to the carboxyl carbon in the same way the oxygen atom of the
alcohol did in the ester synthesis. The reaction shown in the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMzQtQW1pZGUtRm9ybWF0aW9u) uses a
primary amine, which has two hydrogen atoms that could potentially be
removed to form the final product. The same process can also occur with
a secondary amine, which still has one hydrogen attached to the
nitrogen. Tertiary amines will not form amides, because the new bond to
the carbonyl carbon must replace an existing N-H bond.

The reverse reaction (amide hydrolysis) is very useful in the study of
protein structure. Proteins are long chains of amino acids (each amino
acid contains an amine group and a carboxyl group, both attached to a
central carbon atom). The amino acids are linked together by amide bonds
to form the long protein chain. One of the techniques for looking at
protein structure is to break those amide linkages so we can learn the
identity of the amino acids in the chain. We do this through a
hydrolysis reaction:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-YTA5MDdlMGZiYzNkYTgyNzMwNjQ0Njc2NTRhYzM4ZjA.-uat"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ed (User:Edgar181/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amide_hydrolysis.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446207587.png)

**Figure 25.30**

Hydrolysis of an amide linkage.

</div>

Usually, an acid such as HCl is used for the hydrolysis. The amino acids
can then be separated and identified. More complex reaction conditions
allow the amino acids to be broken off one by one, allowing the amino
acid sequence of an unknown protein to be determined. The
three-dimensional structures and functions of large protein molecules
are ultimately determined by the sequence of amino acids from which they
are constructed.

## Organic Polymers {#25.html#x-ck12-T3JnYW5pYyBQb2x5bWVycw.._2-7wy}

### What Are Polymers? {#25.html#x-ck12-V2hhdCBBcmUgUG9seW1lcnM__2-cg6}

Polymers are a pervasive part of modern life. It is very likely that at
least some part of your clothing is made of nylon, rayon, or polyester.
The milk or juice that you have for breakfast often comes in a
polyethylene container. If you don’t have breakfast at home, you might
get coffee from a fast food establishment, where your order is delivered
to you in a Styrofoam® container. While getting out of your car, you
bang the door on another vehicle. One reason you may not have dented the
door is the fact that it could be made out of a polymeric plastic
material that resists deformation more than simple metallic structures.
Elsewhere on your car, both synthetic and natural rubber are probably
present in the tires. All these materials are examples of organic
polymers.

**Polymers** are long-chain organic molecules made up of many smaller
subunits (called **monomers** ) that are connected together in a
repeating pattern. Some polymers are constructed by living organisms,
such as starch, cellulose, proteins, and DNA. These natural polymers are
covered in the following chapter on *Biochemistry* . In this section, we
will focus on synthetic polymers that are made in the laboratory.

### Important Synthetic Polymers {#25.html#x-ck12-SW1wb3J0YW50IFN5bnRoZXRpYyBQb2x5bWVycw.._2-9er}

One widely used polymer is polystyrene:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NzkxYWYzYzc0ZjM0MTQ0NWM2ZmQ4MWY2YmZjZmVhNTY.-s58"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:H Padleckas/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polystyrene_formation.PNG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446320836.png)

**Figure 25.31**

Polystyrene structure.

</div>

This polymer is used for many purposes. We find it in Styrofoam®
packaging materials, plastic cutlery, CD “jewel cases”, laboratory ware,
and a wide variety of other applications. Polystyrene can take on many
forms, depending on how it is manufactured. It is inexpensive, easy to
work with, and fairly durable.

Polyethylene can come in two forms. The low-density form is used for
squeeze bottles, insulation for wiring, and flexible pipes. The
high-density form is employed in bottles, pipes, and plastic bags.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-OWU2NGM1YTY5YjFlOTIzZDAyMzk1MjNlNjViNmU5MTI.-te2"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Dubaj/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polyetylen2.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446453648.png)

**Figure 25.32**

Repeating unit of polyethylene.

</div>

Polyethylene has the simplest structure of all the polymers; it is
essentially just a very long linear alkane. Its repeating unit is shown
in the **Figure**
[above](#25.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW0tMjUtMzctUG9seWV0aHlsZW5l) .

Polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon®) is very chemically inert and
non-wettable – water does not stick to it. This polymer has found broad
applications in cookware because materials do not stick to it. Since it
does not react with other materials, Teflon storage containers are used
to package highly reactive or corrosive chemicals.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-ZTZmZjJiMGE2NmNjNmVjNzVkNGMxOGU1NTBkYzVkNzc.-gzn"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Calvero/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PTFE_structure.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446602923.png)

**Figure 25.33**

Repeating unit of polytetrafluoroethylene.

</div>

All of these polymers (and many more) are referred to as homopolymers,
because they are composed of a single repeating unit. There is another
class of polymers called copolymers. This group contains two different
repeating units in its structure. Kevlar®, used in body armor, is one
such copolymer:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MWU0MTJjZDVkZGM4ZWE0ZTY3MjIxZDlkMGVhYjA5NTU.-ksk"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27) and User:Jynto/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kevlar-3D-balls.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446718063.png)

**Figure 25.34**

Structure of Kevlar®.

</div>

One of the repeating units is a substituted benzene ring with attached
amine groups, while the other repeating unit contains carbonyl groups
connected to the benzene ring. In addition to the strong covalent bonds
that link these monomers together, the polymeric chains interact with
one another via hydrogen bonds, further increasing the strength of the
material.

### Synthesis of Polymers {#25.html#x-ck12-U3ludGhlc2lzIG9mIFBvbHltZXJz_2-mk7}

We will now look at two of the reactions that are commonly used to
create synthetic polymers. One way to form polymers is through addition
reactions. If each monomer contains an alkene or alkyne, various methods
can be used to connect each side of the multiple bond with one of the
other monomers, resulting in a long chain.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-YmRiM2MzNDIzMjhmN2JhMGVmYzE5MDY4Y2UyMGQ5NTE.-aul"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446867511.png)

**Figure 25.35**

Steps in addition reaction.

</div>

One way to form an addition polymer is through a radical chain reaction.
The steps in this process are as follows:

1.  A free radical initiator attacks the carbon-carbon double bond. The
    initiator can be something like hydrogen peroxide, which can be
    split with light or heat to form two radical species, each of which
    contains a reactive, unpaired electron (H-O-O-H → 2 H-O). This free
    radical attacks a carbon-carbon double bond. The initiator binds to
    one of the carbon atoms using its unpaired electron and one of the
    pi electrons from the double bond. The other pi electron forms a new
    free radical on the other carbon atom.
2.  The new free radical adds to another alkene, generating yet another
    unpaired electron and continuing the process of chain growth.
3.  Termination occurs whenever two free radicals meet. The two unpaired
    electrons form a covalent bond, ending the chain reaction.

The other general category of polymer synthesis reactions are the
condensation reactions. In these situations, a reaction occurs between
two different functional groups with the expulsion of water. For
example, polyesters and polyamides can be formed via the condensation
reactions discussed earlier in this lesson.

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-NWJmMTJmY2FmMWJmZmQzNDFlZWNiMmU3OGY1YjQ0MmY.-qlv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235446990759.png)

**Figure 25.36**

A condensation reaction.

</div>

Another condensation reaction can be seen in the synthesis of Kevlar®:

<div
id="25.html#x-ck12-MDBmNjM2NWU4ZDdhNGVmZThmMmNjNWVhOTMyMzVmZmM.-ouv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Joy Sheng" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_25_files/20151009235447201963.png)

**Figure 25.37**

Synthesis of Kevlar®.

</div>

In this case, we see the formation of amide bonds between amines and
acyl halides (which can be thought of as “activated” carboxylic acids).
Note that each molecule must have two functional groups in order for
this type of polymerization to occur.

## Lesson Summary {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-zcd}

-   Alkenes and alkynes can be reduced with hydrogen gas to
    form alkanes.
-   Alkenes can react with halogens to form dihalides.
-   Alkenes can react with water to form alcohols.
-   Alcohols can lose water to form alkenes.
-   Alcohols can be oxidized to aldehydes or ketones.
-   Aldehydes can be oxidized to carboxylic acids.
-   Carboxylic acids can form esters with alcohols.
-   Carboxylic acids can form amides with amines.
-   Polymers are long-chain materials with useful properties.

## Lesson Review Questions {#25.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-qu5}

1.  Name the product (class of compound) formed in the following
    reactions:
    1.  alcohol + carboxylic acid
    2.  primary alcohol + oxidizing agent
    3.  ketone + oxidizing agent
    4.  alkene + hydrogen + metal catalyst

2.  What class of compound(s) would be used to form the following
    product:
    1.  amide
    2.  ketone
    3.  halogenated alkane
    4.  alcohol

3.  Draw the structure of the product formed in the following reactions:
    1.  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CH=CHCH ~3~ + Cl ~2~
    2.  CH ~3~ CH ~2~ CHOHCH ~3~ + oxidizing agent

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#25.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-vv8}

-   Summaries of organic reactions:
    [http://pages.towson.edu/ladon/orgrxs/reactsum.htm](reactsum.htm)
-   Polymer addition reactions:
    [http://www.materialsworldmodules.org/resources/polimarization/3-addition.html](3-addition.html)

## Points to Consider {#25.html#x-ck12-UG9pbnRzIHRvIENvbnNpZGVy_2-fqa}

-   What do reactions in living cells have in common with these organic
    reactions? How are they similar and how are they different?

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686183] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#25.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-1vo}

1.  User:Leyo/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synthesis\_of\_urea.svg](File:Synthesis_of_urea.svg) .
    Public Domain
2.  Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
3.  Zachary Wilson. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
4.  Zachary Wilson, using 3D model by Ben Mills
    (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons). [CK-12 Foundation; 3D
    molecule:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetylene-CRC-IR-3D-vdW.png](File:Acetylene-CRC-IR-3D-vdW.png) .
    CC BY-NC 3.0 (3D model available under public domain)
5.  Martin Walker (User:Walkerma/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:HexaneFull.png](File:HexaneFull.png) .
    Public Domain
6.  Joel Holdsworth.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg](File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg) .
    Public Domain
7.  Joel Holdsworth.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg](File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg) .
    Public Domain
8.  User:Calvero/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg](File:Hexane-2D-Skeletal.svg) .
    Public Domain
9.  User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Diels-Alder\_endo\_exo.svg](File:Diels-Alder_endo_exo.svg) .
    Public Domain
10. User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons; User:Bryan Derksen/Wikimedia
    Commons; User:Edgar181/Wikimedia Commons, derivative work:
    User:Rodolopezdato/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benzene-3D-vdW.png;
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benzene\_both.svg;
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Benzene-resonance-structures.svg](File:Benzene-resonance-structures.svg) .
    Public Domain
11. Christopher Auyeung. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC
    BY-NC 3.0
12. Peter Lai. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
13. User:Kes47/Wikimedia Commons. [Primary:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Primary-amine-2D-general.svg;
    Secondary:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Secondary-amine-2D-general.svg;
    Tertiary:
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amine-2D-general.svg](File:Amine-2D-general.svg) .
    Public Domain
14. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
15. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
16. Peter Lai. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
17. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
18. Peter Lai. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
19. Peter Lai. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
20. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
21. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
22. User:McMonster/Wikimedia Commons;
    User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethene\_structural.svg,
    http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethane-flat.png](File:Ethane-flat.png) .
    Public Domain
23. User:Eschenmoser/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stereo-Add-Brom-Alken.png](File:Stereo-Add-Brom-Alken.png) .
    Public Domain
24. Pete Davis.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synthesis\_of\_alkenes\_-\_Dehydrohalogenation.png](File:Synthesis_of_alkenes_-_Dehydrohalogenation.png) .
    Public Domain
25. Pete Davis.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Synthesis\_of\_alkenes\_-\_Dehydration\_of\_alcohol.png](File:Synthesis_of_alkenes_-_Dehydration_of_alcohol.png) .
    Public Domain
26. User:ChVA/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Reaction\_of\_production\_of\_formic\_with\_methanol\_oxidation.png](File:Reaction_of_production_of_formic_with_methanol_oxidation.png) .
    Public Domain
27. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
28. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ester-from-acid-and-alcohol-2D-skeletal.png](File:Ester-from-acid-and-alcohol-2D-skeletal.png) .
    Public Domain
29. User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amidbildung.svg](File:Amidbildung.svg) .
    Public Domain
30. Ed (User:Edgar181/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amide\_hydrolysis.svg](File:Amide_hydrolysis.svg) .
    Public Domain
31. User:H Padleckas/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polystyrene\_formation.PNG](File:Polystyrene_formation.PNG) .
    Public Domain
32. User:Dubaj/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Polyetylen2.png](File:Polyetylen2.png) .
    Public Domain
33. User:Calvero/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PTFE\_structure.png](File:PTFE_structure.png) .
    Public Domain
34. Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27) and User:Jynto/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Kevlar-3D-balls.png](File:Kevlar-3D-balls.png) .
    Public Domain
35. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
36. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
37. Joy Sheng. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0

<span id="26.html"></span>

# Biochemistry {#26.html#x-ck12-QmlvY2hlbWlzdHJ5-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

<span class="x-ck12-img-inline"> <!-- @@author="" -->
<!-- @@license="" --> ![](ck12_26_files/20151009235452067129.jpeg)
</span>

The primary role of red blood cells in the circulatory system is to
transport oxygen to the tissues. The actual carrier of oxygen molecules
is the protein hemoglobin, which binds to the oxygen and moves it
throughout the body, releasing it in areas where the concentration of
dissolved oxygen is low. A certain mutation in the gene for hemoglobin
causes a slight change in the structure of this crucial protein,
resulting in a disease called sickle-cell anemia. For people with this
mutation, the hemoglobin produced by their red blood cells has a
tendency to clump together, distorting the shape of the red blood cells
and giving rise to the crescent-shaped cells seen above. By
understanding the changes in structure that are the underlying cause of
this disease, we have developed various ways to treat and manage this
illness.

Biochemistry is the study of chemical processes in living systems. In
this chapter, we will explore some of the basic chemical components of
biological systems and develop an understanding of the roles played by
each major type of biomolecule.

^United\\ States,\\ National\\ Human\\ Genome\\ Research\\ Institute.\\ commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sicklecells4.jpg.\\ Public\\ Domain.^

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686185] -->

# Carbohydrates {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2FyYm9oeWRyYXRlcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM.-syk}

-   Draw open-chain and cyclic structures for carbohydrates.
-   Classify carbohydrates by chain length.
-   Classify carbohydrates as monosaccharides, disaccharides,
    or polysaccharides.
-   Describe the digestion and utilization of carbohydrates in the body.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk.-2wy}

-   **carbohydrate** : A class of organic compounds with a chemical
    formula of the form C ~n~ (H ~2~ O) ~n~ , or a derivative of such
    a compound.
-   **monosaccharide** : The simplest basic unit of carbohydrates.
-   **disaccharide** : A simple carbohydrate made up of
    two monosaccharides.
-   **polysaccharide** : A carbohydrate made of many monosaccharides.
-   **glycogen** : A polysaccharide composed of long chains of
    glucose units.
-   **glycolysis** : The “splitting of glucose” to form products used in
    biochemical energy production.
-   **gluconeogenesis** : The process of generating glucose from other
    chemical components in the body.

## Check Your Understanding {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n-u9f}

### Recalling Past Knowledge {#26.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFBhc3QgS25vd2xlZGdl-gpa}

-   What are the structures for each of the following functional groups:
    -   alcohol
    -   aldehyde
    -   ketone

## Carbohydrate Structure {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2FyYm9oeWRyYXRlIFN0cnVjdHVyZQ..-pei}

**Carbohydrates** are a class of organic compounds in which each carbon
in the chain is bonded to an oxygen atom, either through a single bond
to an OH group or through a double bond, making a carbonyl. The name
comes from the fact that the chemical formula for a carbohydrate can be
written in the form C ~n~ (H ~2~ O) ~n~ , where n is some integer.
However, carbohydrates are not actually “hydrates of carbon.” No water
molecules are actually present, and each oxygen in the formula is bonded
to at least one carbon atom.

One of the most important carbohydrates is glucose, shown in the
**Figure** [below](#26.html#x-ck12-c3RydWN0dXJlX29mX2dsdWNvc2U.) .

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-MThmZjBiYTgwZDk4OGRiMDRiMWVkY2I3ZWU2ZGE4OGY.-bcv"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons; User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:D-glucose-chain-2D-Fischer.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235452201981.png)

**Figure 26.1**

Structure of glucose, a typical carbohydrate.

</div>

The glucose molecule illustrated in the **Figure**
[above](#26.html#x-ck12-c3RydWN0dXJlX29mX2dsdWNvc2U.) has a carbonyl on
C-1 and –OH groups on each of the other carbons. This way of
representing the structure is known as a Fischer projection, named after
the German chemist Emil Fischer (1852-1919), who studied carbohydrate
chemistry.

When dissolved in water, most of the glucose molecules are not actually
present in the form represented in the **Figure**
[above](#26.html#x-ck12-c3RydWN0dXJlX29mX2dsdWNvc2U.) . Instead, one of
the oxygen atoms near the end of the chain becomes bonded to the
carbonyl carbon, and a subsequent transfer of hydrogen results in the
cyclic structure shown in **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfMV9jeWNsaWNfZ2x1Y29zZQ..) .

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-ZWZlNjU1NTRhZDhkZDNmYmE3ZTI2NDhiNjk3ZjEyOTI.-ge2"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alpha-D-Glucopyranose.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235452307418.png)

**Figure 26.2**

Cyclic structure of glucose.

</div>

Because six-membered rings are particularly stable, the oxygen atom used
to form the ring will generally be on a carbon atom that is five away
from the carbonyl. If such a situation is not possible, five-membered
rings can also be formed. Rings of other sizes are generally less
favorable than the open-chain form and will not be present in large
amounts.

## Classes of Carbohydrates {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2xhc3NlcyBvZiBDYXJib2h5ZHJhdGVz-sif}

There are several methods of classifying the various possible
carbohydrates. The simplest carbohydrates consist of a short chain or a
single ring. These structures can be classified by the number of carbons
in the chain. The terms used for simple carbohydrates with 3-6 carbon
atoms in their primary chain are shown below:

<dl id="x-ck12-MWNiNThkODIwYjNiMGI4MGZiNjhiNDA3YzNmZDYyNDg.-1v8">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-MWNiNThkODIwYjNiMGI4MGZiNjhiNDA3YzNmZDYyNDg.-g5w">
<dd>
triose – three carbons

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
<dl id="x-ck12-NzgwMGU1MjI0NTFlNTdhNTMwMmZiYzVkM2QxNzdiOGQ.-0p7">
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-Y2JhM2UwYzUwNWE2Y2M3MDJjZmI0ODQ3ZTgzOTNlZjk.-65n">
<dd>
tetrose – four carbons

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-NjUzMjIwMzAxNjY4ZjRkMGU3ZjVlMzRjYzNjOWMyZDU.-o2s">
<dd>
pentose – five carbons

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dd>
<dl id="x-ck12-YjZjMTc2ZjZhZDA1ODcxNDA2ODY0YTMzMmM3ZjA1NzQ.-qxg">
<dd>
hexose – six carbons

</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
</dl>
Some of the most important simple carbohydrates studied in biochemistry
include ribose and deoxyribose (pentoses involved in the structure of
nucleic acids) and glucose, fructose, and galactose (hexoses that make
major contributions to our diet).

The simple carbohydrates discussed above are used as the building blocks
for complex carbohydrates. **Monosaccharides** like glucose or fructose
can be linked together to form larger structures. When two
monosaccharides are bound together, the result is a **disaccharide** .
Some common disaccharides are shown in the **Table**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6ZGlzYWNjaGFyaWRl) .

  Disaccharide   Made up of
  -------------- ---------------------
  sucrose        glucose + fructose
  lactose        glucose + galactose
  maltose        glucose + glucose

Longer chains of monosaccharides are referred to as **polysaccharides**
. Starch, glycogen, and cellulose are three extremely common
polysaccharides made entirely out of glucose molecules. The differences
lie in the types of bonds between the glucose units and the extent of
branching in the carbohydrate chain. Starch is found in plants and is
consumed as part of our diet. **Glycogen** is made by the body and is a
storage form of glucose for when the cells need extra energy. Cellulose
is another long-chain polysaccharide found in plants. Unlike starch and
glycogen, the human body cannot break cellulose down into molecules of
glucose. Although cellulose does not have any nutritional value in terms
of calories, it is a major component of dietary fiber, which has other
digestive benefits.

## Carbohydrate Intake and Utilization {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2FyYm9oeWRyYXRlIEludGFrZSBhbmQgVXRpbGl6YXRpb24.-w16}

### Dietary Consumption and Digestion of Carbohydrates {#26.html#x-ck12-RGlldGFyeSBDb25zdW1wdGlvbiBhbmQgRGlnZXN0aW9uIG9mIENhcmJvaHlkcmF0ZXM.-jhn}

There are several dietary sources of carbohydrates. Starch is found in
many vegetables (especially potatoes) and baked goods. Sucrose (table
sugar) is included as part of many prepared foods. Lactose is found in
milk products, and maltose is present in some vegetables.

A small amount of starch digestion will occur in the mouth, but the bulk
of this process occurs in the small intestine. Amylase, an enzyme
produced in the pancreas and released into the interior of the small
intestine, breaks complex carbohydrates like starch into disaccharides
and trisaccharides. These molecules are then cleaved into their
corresponding monosaccharides by specific enzymes located in the
interior wall of the small intestine.

  Disaccharide   Enzyme    Products
  -------------- --------- ---------------------
  sucrose        sucrase   glucose + fructose
  lactose        lactase   glucose + galactose
  maltose        maltase   glucose + glucose

Many people have very low levels of the lactase enzyme. As a result,
lactose (found in most dairy products) accumulates in the small
intestine, since it cannot be fully digested. This can result in
bloating, cramps, abdominal distress, and nausea. Reduction or
elimination of lactose in the diet is the most effective treatment.

### Cellular Utilization of Carbohydrates {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2VsbHVsYXIgVXRpbGl6YXRpb24gb2YgQ2FyYm9oeWRyYXRlcw..-qbt}

What happens after complex carbohydrates have been broken down into
simple monosaccharides? When energy is needed, glucose is broken down
further via a multi-step process called **glycolysis** , which means
“splitting of glucose.” All common monosaccharides can be converted by
the body to glucose or to some other intermediate along the glycolytic
pathway. The key “splitting” reaction occurs when the enzyme aldolase
splits fructose-1, 6-disphosphate into two three-carbon compounds. These
two compounds then interconvert and form two molecules of pyruvate, the
end-product of the glycolytic pathway.

Pyruvate then enters an intracellular organelle called the mitochondrion
(plural: mitochondria). Through a complex series of processes including
two separate pathways, the cell uses O ~2~ and pyruvate to form, among
other things, a molecule known as ATP. This compound is essential for
many biochemical reactions as well as for processes such as muscle
contraction and movement of materials across cell membranes.

### Formation of Glucose in the Body {#26.html#x-ck12-Rm9ybWF0aW9uIG9mIEdsdWNvc2UgaW4gdGhlIEJvZHk.-rqh}

Shortly after eating, there is a surplus of glucose in the body. Some of
it will be used immediately, but the rest is stored in the form of
glycogen. Between meals, when the level of glucose in the blood drops
below a certain point, a signal is sent to the liver that says “make
more glucose.” In response, the glycogen in the liver is broken down and
the resulting glucose is released into the bloodstream.

Alternatively, the body can make glucose molecules from simpler
components in a process known as **gluconeogenesis** . In addition to
carbohydrates, fats and proteins can also be broken down into the
starting materials for gluconeogenesis, so they are indirect sources of
glucose. As a result, any of these classes of compounds can be used by
the body to produce energy.

## Lesson Summary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk.-zpc}

-   Carbohydrates have a chemical formula that can be written in the
    form C ~n~ (H ~2~ O) ~n~ .
-   Simple carbohydrates can be classified in terms of chain length.
-   Monosaccharides can be linked together to form disaccharides
    or polysaccharides.
-   Digestion of polysaccharides and disaccharides in the small
    intestine produces glucose and other monosaccharides.
-   Glucose undergoes a lengthy series of reactions that ultimately
    results in the formation of ATP.
-   Glycogen breakdown and gluconeogenesis are two complementary
    pathways used by the body to produce glucose when the concentration
    of glucose in the blood is low.

## Lesson Review Questions {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM.-fe0}

1.  What is the origin of the term “carbohydrate”?
2.  Name the term used for carbohydrates with the following chain
    lengths:
    1.  four carbons
    2.  six carbons
    3.  five carbons

3.  Classify each of the following carbohydrates as a monosaccharide, a
    disaccharide, or a polysaccharide:
    1.  lactose
    2.  ribose
    3.  glycogen
    4.  galactose
    5.  sucrose
    6.  starch

4.  How many pyruvate molecules can be formed from the metabolism of
    three molecules of glucose?
5.  What relationship is there between glucose metabolism and ATP
    formation?
6.  Explain how glycogen and amino acids (components of proteins) can
    both be used to produce glucose in the bloodstream.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#26.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M.-i0a}

-   Carbohydrates as nutrients:
    [http://www.fao.org/docrep/field/003/AB470E/AB470E04.htm](AB470E04.htm)

<!-- -->

-   Carbohydrates and diet:
    [http://www.umm.edu/ency/article/002469fod.htm](002469fod.htm)

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686185] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686186] -->

# Amino Acids and Proteins {#26.html#x-ck12-QW1pbm8gQWNpZHMgYW5kIFByb3RlaW5z}

## Lesson Objectives {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._1-ew0}

-   Draw the structure of a generic amino acid.
-   Define the following aspects of protein structure:
    -   Primary
    -   Secondary
    -   Tertiary
    -   Quaternary
-   List and describe the functions of proteins.
-   Describe how an enzyme catalyzes a biochemical reaction.
-   List the six classes of reactions catalyzed by enzymes.
-   Describe the structure of hemoglobin and its role in
    oxygen transport.
-   Describe the molecular problems that lead to sickle cell disease.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._1-9mw}

-   alpha helix
-   amino acid
-   beta sheet
-   enzyme
-   secondary structure
-   primary structure
-   protein
-   quaternary structure
-   tertiary structure

## Check Your Understanding {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_1-ytq}

### Recalling Past Knowledge {#26.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFBhc3QgS25vd2xlZGdl_1-bei}

-   What is the structure of a carboxylic acid?
-   What is the structure of an amine?
-   What is the structure of an amide?

## Amino Acids {#26.html#x-ck12-QW1pbm8gQWNpZHM._1-zco}

**Amino acids** are a class of molecules that contain both the
carboxylic acid and amine functional groups. Amino acids are key
building blocks in biological systems. The most common biologically
relevant amino acids have the generic structure shown in the **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-R2VuZXJpY19hbWlub19hY2lk) , in which a central
carbon atom is connected to an NH ~2~ group, a CO ~2~ H group, and a
variable R group.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-NDNkMDY1NjFhYWFjMTZhYmRiMDhjNjllOWEyZmJkZmI.-qex"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:L-Aminos%C3%A4ure_Rest.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235452534295.png)

**Figure 26.3**

Generic amino acid.

</div>

The only difference between one amino acid and another is the structure
of the R group. In the simplest amino acid, glycine, the R group is just
a hydrogen atom. However, other common amino acids may involve alcohols,
amines, carboxylic acids, or aromatic rings.

Many amino acids can be linked together to form a long chain known as a
**protein** . These linkages are formed when the carboxylic acid of one
amino acid reacts with the amine of another to produce an amide (see
**Figure** [below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfNg..) ).

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-NDJiZjE0MzE0MGE2YWFlMWI1ODBmNWM0ZDllMTBiNDI.-1ay"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:YassineMrabet/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Peptidformationball.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235452738461.png)

**Figure 26.4**

Peptide bond in protein.

</div>

In the context of proteins, the newly formed bond between the carboxyl
carbon and the amine nitrogen is referred to as an amide bond or a
peptide bond.

Nearly all biological proteins are constructed from a set of just 20
common amino acids. The names, abbreviations, and other information for
each of these amino acids are presented in the **Table**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6QW1pbm9BY2lk) .

<div id="26.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6QW1pbm9BY2lk">

[![](images/table.png)](table_26-1.html)

**Click on the image above to view the table**

</div>

## Protein Structure {#26.html#x-ck12-UHJvdGVpbiBTdHJ1Y3R1cmU._1-kej}

The structural features of complete proteins can be broken down into
four levels, referred to as primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary
structures. These levels are illustrated in the **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-cHJvdGVpbl9zdHJ1Y3R1cmU.) .

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-M2U3ZDc1MjRhMmIyMjhhZTRlMTNlZDBlOWFmMGU1Yzc.-tzc"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Main_protein_structure_levels_en.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235452867368.png)

**Figure 26.5**

Hierarchy of protein structure.

</div>

The **primary structure** of a protein is simply the sequence of amino
acids from which it is constructed. By convention, this sequence is
written starting with the N-terminal amino acid, which has a free –NH
~2~ group, and ending with the C-terminal amino acid, which has a free
carboxylic acid. Because protein sequences can be very long, the
abbreviations listed in the **Table**
[above](#26.html#x-ck12-dGFibGU6QW1pbm9BY2lk) are commonly used. For
example, the sequence lysine-histidine-threonine-valine can be written
as either Lys-His-Thr-Val or KHTV.

The **secondary structure** of a protein refers to local coiling or
folding. This aspect of the structure applies only to a section of the
protein, not the entire structure. The two basic forms of secondary
structure are the **alpha helix** and the **beta sheet** . Because they
have to do with the ways that multiple amides pack together, one or both
of these substructures show up in most long protein strands. The
appearance of alpha helices and beta sheets can be predicted fairly well
(by computers) from the primary sequence of amino acids.

**Tertiary structure** refers to the overall three-dimensional shape of
an entire protein chain. Because of the ways that proteins can fold in
on themselves, tertiary structure often involves interactions between
amino acids that are very far apart in the primary sequence. Ultimately,
this is also dependent on the primary sequence of the protein, but
because of these long-range interactions, predicting tertiary structures
from sequences of amino acids is still very difficult.

**Quaternary structure** refers only to proteins in which more than one
chain of amino acids interact to form a single functional structure. If
a protein consists of only a single chain, it does not have any
quaternary structure. The separate subunits in such a protein are held
together by ionic bonds and various types of intermolecular forces,
especially hydrogen bonds. They are not covalently bonded to one
another, so the individual chains can be separated and studied
individually. These subunits can also be recombined to form the original
protein.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-MzRlN2ZhYzI2MmZlNWUzNWFiZWE3MmFhY2EwNDQ0ODY.-mge"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Adamandalex/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Succinate_Dehydrogenase.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453008816.jpeg)

**Figure 26.6**

Structure of succinate dehydrogenase.

</div>

In the **Figure**
[above](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfMl9TdWNjaW5hdGVfRGVoeWRyb2dlbmFzZQ..)
, we see the quaternary structure of an enzyme called succinate
dehydrogenase. Four different peptide chains, each drawn in a different
color, combine to form the fully functional protein. Again, the four
chains are not covalently bound to one another, but they are held
together by various other attractive forces. A number of alpha helix
groups can also be seen in this structure, especially in the orange and
blue subunits.

## Protein Functions {#26.html#x-ck12-UHJvdGVpbiBGdW5jdGlvbnM._1-4ge}

Proteins play a variety of important roles in biochemical systems. Some
of the most common protein functions are listed below:

1.  Structural – Support for tissues is provided by structural proteins.
    For example, collagen is a structural protein that provides a matrix
    in which bones can develop. Calcium phosphate deposited on a
    collagen scaffold provides the basis for forming strong bones.
2.  Enzymes – Enzymes are used to catalyze biochemical reactions. We
    will look more at this class of proteins in the following section.
3.  Hormones – Hormones are molecular signals that help regulate a
    number of biochemical processes. Single amino acids and short
    protein chains are very common types of hormones. For example,
    insulin is a protein hormone that regulates the amount of glucose
    present in the bloodstream.
4.  Antibodies – These proteins recognize and combine with harmful
    materials, including both toxic chemicals and invasive
    microorganisms (such as bacteria and viruses). When an antibody
    binds to its target, it is tagged for destruction. This tag is
    recognized by white blood cells, which complete the process. Some
    antibodies also partially or completely deactivate their targets
    while waiting for further help from white blood cells.
5.  Transport – Some proteins bind to specific materials and carry them
    around the body through the bloodstream to a place where they are
    currently needed. For example, transferrin shuttles iron in and out
    of cells. Hemoglobin is an extremely important protein that binds to
    molecular oxygen and carries it throughout the body. We will discuss
    hemoglobin further in its own section.
6.  Storage – The body does not like to get rid of materials that it
    might find useful later. Storage proteins such as albumin preserve
    amino acids until they are needed.

### Enzymes {#26.html#x-ck12-RW56eW1lcw.._1-v0o}

Enzymes are biochemical catalysts, which means that they speed up the
rate of a specific chemical reaction. A process that might take weeks in
the absence of an enzyme can occur in milliseconds if the proper enzyme
is present. A generic enzyme-catalyzed reaction could be represented as
follows:

![\\text{Substrate} \\overset{enzyme}{\\rightarrow}
\\text{Product}](ck12_math_images_dir/eeca51141ef16cb963266b51b2f7f867.png)

The mechanism of the reaction above is somewhat more complicated. In
general, the first step involves the enzyme binding to a substrate (the
reactant or reactants in the process), forming an enzyme-substrate
complex. The enzyme then undergoes a shift in its conformation to
produce the product or products, which are then released from the enzyme
active site.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-YzgwYWJiYmNkMmQ2YWRkNGUxYzI0YmQwNzQxYjI0Mjk.-8lv"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:TimVickers/Wikimedia Commons and User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Induced_fit_diagram.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453120336.png)

**Figure 26.7**

Typical enzyme-substrate interaction.

</div>

Over 1,500 enzymes are known. In order to keep track of all these
compounds, a classification system was developed based on the type of
reaction catalyzed by each enzyme. Six broad families of enzymes are
defined as follows:

1.  Oxidoreductase – This type of enzyme moves electrons from one
    compound to another, usually accompanied by hydrogen atoms (one
    proton + one electron).
2.  Transferase – These enzymes transfer functional groups (such as –NH
    ~2~ or -PO ~4~ ) from one molecule to another.
3.  Hydrolase – A hydrolase splits a molecule into two fragments by
    using water. The catalyzed reaction is referred to as a hydrolysis.
4.  Lyase – These enzymes split a molecule into fragments without
    using water.
5.  Isomerase – Isomerases catalyze rearrangements of their substrates
    but do not add or subtract material.
6.  Ligase – These enzymes catalyze the formation of various covalent
    bonds between separate molecules.

### Hemoglobin {#26.html#x-ck12-SGVtb2dsb2Jpbg.._1-tan}

Hemoglobin is a large iron-containing protein that binds to oxygen
molecules and transports them around the body. There are four subunits
(separate chains) in the hemoglobin complex – two alpha subunits and two
beta subunits. Each subunit contains one iron ion. Its oxidation state
changes back and forth between +2 and +3, depending on whether it is
bound to oxygen.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-Yzc2MmU4NzU3N2E4NmY4OTg0NDAxOGI3OGJlNTY3NjA.-av1"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of Todd L. Mollan, CBER, US Food and Drug Administration" -->
<!-- @@url="http://blogs.fda.gov/fdavoice/index.php/tag/blood-substitutes/" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453396154.png)

**Figure 26.8**

Hemoglobin molecule.

</div>

The yellow subunits are identical in structure, as are the gray
subunits. A smaller organic structure called a porphyrin ring is
attached to each protein subunit and contains the iron ion used to bind
oxygen.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-NTE4NTdlMThhNTRiNDg1M2E0MWQ4MzljYzk2MzA1Yjk.-wag"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Ich" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Haemoglobin.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453555464.png)

**Figure 26.9**

Oxygen binding to iron in hemoglobin.

</div>

When the oxygen binds to the iron, the three-dimensional shape of the
molecule changes. Upon release of the oxygen to the cells, the shape
changes back.

Some individuals have a specific mutation in the primary sequence of
their hemoglobin molecules that causes them to aggregate, resulting in a
deformation of their red blood cells. This abnormality is genetic in
nature. A person may inherit the gene from one parent and have sickle
cell trait (only some of the hemoglobin is hemoglobin S), which is
usually not life-threatening. Inheriting the gene from both parents will
result in sickle cell disease, which is a very serious condition.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-YzY2ZmJjMzdkZjAyMDUwYjlkMjM5MzFiZTEzMDdjNTI.-wzh"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sickle_cell_01.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453654229.jpeg)

**Figure 26.10**

Sickling in red cells due to presence of hemoglobin S.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._1-k9c}

-   Amino acids contain both a carboxylic acid group and an amine group.
-   Proteins are formed by the linkage of amino acids with
    amide (peptide) bonds.
-   There are four levels of protein structure: primary, secondary,
    tertiary, and quaternary.
-   Proteins serve numerous functions in the body, including structural
    support, catalysis, and molecular transportation.
-   Enzymes catalyze biochemical reactions.
-   Enzymes are classified by the types of reactions that they catalyze.
-   Hemoglobin is a protein containing four subunits that transports
    oxygen throughout the body.
-   In sickle-cell disease, an abnormal hemoglobin structure causes
    aggregation (clumping) of that protein, which results in deformation
    of the red blood cells.

## Lesson Review Questions {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._1-z6v}

1.  Draw a generic amino acid.
2.  Draw a structure showing how two amino acids form a peptide bond.
3.  Define the following aspects of protein structure:
    1.  primary
    2.  secondary
    3.  tertiary
    4.  quaternary

4.  List six common functions of proteins.
5.  Write the generic form for an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
6.  Describe the structure of the hemoglobin molecule.
7.  Describe the molecular defect that causes sickle-cell disease.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#26.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._1-gu5}

-   Protein structure:
    [http://www.chemguide.co.uk/organicprops/aminoacids/proteinstruct.html](proteinstruct.html)

<!-- -->

-   Levels of protein structure:
    [http://lectures.molgen.mpg.de/ProteinStructure/Levels/index.html](index.html)

<!-- -->

-   Sickle cell disease:
    [http://www.webmd.com/a-to-z-guides/sickle-cell-test](sickle-cell-test)

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686186] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686187] -->

# Lipids {#26.html#x-ck12-TGlwaWRz}

## Lesson Objectives {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._2-ctk}

-   List various classes of lipids and explain their functions.
-   Describe the digestion of lipids in the small intestine.
-   List various classes of lipoproteins and explain their functions.
-   Describe the utilization of stored triglycerides for
    biochemical energy.
-   Explain the relationship between cholesterol and heart disease.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._2-sf8}

-   cholesterol
-   chylomicron
-   fatty acid
-   glycerol
-   lipid
-   lipoprotein
-   steroid
-   triglyceride

## Check Your Understanding {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_2-own}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#26.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._2-bza}

-   What is the structure of a carboxylic acid?
-   What is the structure of an ester?
-   What do enzymes do?

## Classes of Lipids {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2xhc3NlcyBvZiBMaXBpZHM._2-fbn}

In the lesson on carbohydrates, we saw that monosaccharides all have a
similar structure, but with slight variations. Many monosaccharides can
then be linked together to form long polysaccharide chains. Similarly,
amino acids all share some of the same structural features, and linking
many amino acids together results in the formation of proteins. In
contrast, lipids constitute a much broader class of compounds. A
**lipid** is a biological molecule that is soluble in nonpolar solvents.
This also means that lipids are generally not very soluble in polar
solvents, such as water. Because of this characteristic, lipids in the
body generally cluster together in order to minimize contact with water,
and transportation of lipid molecules throughout the body requires that
they be reversibly attached to various transport proteins. A lipid
bonded to a protein is referred to as a **lipoprotein** .

In the **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfM19Db21tb25fbGlwaWRz) , we see the
structures of some common classes of lipids. Free **fatty acids** are
carboxylic acids that contain long hydrocarbon chains. Saturated fatty
acids are alkanes with a single carboxylic acid, whereas unsaturated
fatty acids contain one or more C-C double bonds. Fatty acids often form
esters with one of the alcohol functional groups on **glycerol** , a
three carbon chain in which each carbon is bonded to one OH group.
**Triglycerides** are common structures, in which all three of these OH
groups are esterified with a fatty acid. The three fatty acids in a
triglyceride may be the same or different. Another common structure is a
phospholipid, in which two of the alcohols in glycerol form esters with
fatty acids, and the third is connected to a very polar
phosphorus-containing group.

**Cholesterol** is also considered to be a lipid, even though its
structure is very different from the ones we have discussed so far.
Cholesterol belongs to a broader class of lipids called **steroids** ,
all of which possess the same four-ring hydrocarbon core. Other common
steroids include cortisol, testosterone, and estrogen.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-ZDMwY2NiOTYxNzk4ZDg5MjBhZDU4YzZlZjA1YmUzMWE.-yl4"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Roadnottaken/Wikipedia" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Common_lipids.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453780965.png)

**Figure 26.11**

Classes of lipids.

</div>

In addition to the categories of lipids listed above, various vitamins
are also classified as lipids, including vitamins A, D, E, and K. You
may sometimes hear these referred to as “fat-soluble” vitamins, because
they are nonpolar structures that are more soluble in other lipids than
in water.

## Functions of Lipids {#26.html#x-ck12-RnVuY3Rpb25zIG9mIExpcGlkcw.._2-a5h}

Lipids play several important roles in the body. Triglycerides are
stored in fat cells until the body needs to break them down for chemical
energy. These stored triglycerides also help insulate the body against
extreme temperatures and cushion organs against physical jostling.
Phospholipids and cholesterol are important constituents of the cell
membrane. These compounds provide structural integrity to the cell wall,
since they are not water-soluble. Other steroids are used as chemical
messengers in the body, and the fat-soluble vitamins serve a variety of
other functions.

## Digestion of Lipids {#26.html#x-ck12-RGlnZXN0aW9uIG9mIExpcGlkcw.._2-und}

Lipids are consumed in the diet from a variety of foods. Animal products
contain several different types of lipids, including saturated fats,
unsaturated fats, and cholesterol. The degree of unsaturation in the
fatty acids found in food (usually as part of a triglyceride) is thought
be associated with lowering the body's stores of cholesterol.

Triglycerides in the diet are digested in the small intestine. Since
lipids are not water-soluble, they are emulsified with the help of bile
acids, which are produced by the liver and stored in the gall bladder.
Bile acids are cholesterol-derived steroids that also contain a
water-soluble component. The nonpolar region of these acids can interact
with triglycerides, and the water-soluble portion allows the entire
complex to dissolve in the aqueous environment within the body.

The pancreas releases the enzyme lipase to hydrolyze at least two of the
ester linkages of each triglyceride. The fatty acids and glycerol esters
then pass across the intestinal membrane and are resynthesized into
triglycerides on the other side. The re-formed triglycerides (along with
cholesterol and other lipids) are not water-soluble, so they will not
dissolve in the aqueous environment of the bloodstream. Instead, the
newly digested lipids will reassemble as lipoproteins known as
**chylomicrons** in order to move throughout the body.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-dou"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235453921345.jpeg)

**Figure 26.12**

</div>

The outer shell of the chylomicron consists primarily of phospholipids
(green), in which the polar phosphorus-containing groups point outward
towards the surrounding water, allowing these structures to be
relatively water-soluble. Also in the outer shell are various proteins,
labeled in the **Figure** [above](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfMTU.) as
apo A, B, C, and E. Triglycerides (T) and cholesterol (C) are
sequestered on the inside of the chylomicron, along with the nonpolar
portions of the phospholipids. As the chylomicrons circulate, the inner
triglycerides are transported to certain regions of the body, such as
the liver and adipose tissue, where they are unloaded.

Other lipoproteins also transport lipids throughout the body, but
different types of lipoproteins tend to serve different functions. We
will discuss some of these differences in the section below on
cholesterol and heart disease. Lipoproteins are often classified into
five different groups based on their densities. In increasing order of
density, these groups include chylomicrons, very-low-density
lipoproteins (VLDL), intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL),
low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and high-density lipoproteins (HDL).

## Lipids and Biochemical Energy {#26.html#x-ck12-TGlwaWRzIGFuZCBCaW9jaGVtaWNhbCBFbmVyZ3k._2-oyv}

Triglycerides in the body function as a long-term method for storing
biochemical potential energy. Changes in the levels of the hormones
insulin and epinephrine in the blood lead to the release of
triglycerides from adipose tissue. The triglycerides are then broken
down by lipase enzymes into glycerol and fatty acids. After being
transported into the mitochondria, fatty acids are broken down further
into two-carbon fragments, called acetyl CoA. Finally, acetyl CoA
molecules can be used to generate ATP, which functions as a kind of
universal biochemical energy source within the cell. A normal fatty acid
might contain approximately 16 carbons, which would result in the
formation of 8 molecules of acetyl CoA. Each acetyl CoA can then be used
to generate 12 molecules of ATP. Thus, a single fatty acid might be used
to produce nearly 100 ATP molecules.

Regular exercise will increase the demand for ATP and help lower the
amount of triglycerides (stored fat) in the body, as will a decrease in
the consumption of materials that contain triglycerides or other
metabolic energy sources (such as carbohydrates).

### Overview of Metabolism {#26.html#x-ck12-T3ZlcnZpZXcgb2YgTWV0YWJvbGlzbQ.._2-qxc}

The metabolism of fatty acids is highly interconnected with the
breakdown of other dietary energy sources, such as carbohydrates and
protein. Recall that glucose and amino acids can both be broken down to
form the pyruvate molecule. Pyruvate can then be converted into acetyl
CoA, which is then further metabolized to produce ATP. Eventually, all
sources of biochemical energy are funneled into the same overall
reaction pathways.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-MWUwODVjNmNhZjkzZTQwYzVhZWZlNDBlNjRkZTBjYWQ.-wmf"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="CK-12 Foundation" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235454247259.jpeg)

**Figure 26.13**

Overview of energy metabolism.

</div>

Additionally, all of these processes are reversible. The breakdown or
rebuilding of biomolecules is directed by specific environmental cues in
various parts of the body. Because all of these types of molecules can
be broken down to the same common intermediates, they are all
interconvertible using our biochemical machinery. For example, say the
body needs to produce more steroids, but only complex carbohydrates are
available as a source of material. The carbohydrates can be successively
broken down into disaccharides, monosaccharides, pyruvate, and finally
molecules of acetyl CoA. Then, the acetyl CoA can be assembled into
cholesterol, which is then modified to produce the necessary steroid.
Fatty acids, triglycerides, and other lipids can be generated in a
similar way.

## Cholesterol and Heart Disease {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2hvbGVzdGVyb2wgYW5kIEhlYXJ0IERpc2Vhc2U._2-xjs}

Because of the link between high levels of cholesterol and heart
disease, it is commonly seen by the general public as a “bad” molecule.
However, cholesterol plays a vital role in the body, as both a
structural component of cell membranes and a metabolic precursor to
various steroid hormones. Only about 30% of the cholesterol in our
bodies comes from our diet; the rest is synthesized in the liver,
intestines, adrenal glands, and reproductive organs. The same acetyl CoA
molecule that provides biochemical energy can also be used by the body
to synthesize cholesterol. There are approximately twenty-two steps
involved in the formation of cholesterol from acetyl CoA.

Cholesterol has been implicated in heart disease for decades.
Atherosclerosis is a disorder of the arteries in which cholesterol and
other materials are deposited on the interior of the arterial wall.
These deposits lead to the formation of plaques that can restrict or
even block the flow of blood through these blood vessels (see **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfMTdfcGxhcXVlX2FydGVyeQ..) ). A
decrease in the flow of blood can lead to high blood pressure and a
lowered oxygen supply to the heart muscle. A complete blockage of blood
flow to parts of the heart (a heart attack) can cause significant damage
due to oxygen deprivation, in some cases leading to death.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-OWQxMDk4OGM0YzgzYmVmNzdmNjg5YWZlZWMyODliN2M.-csz"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Courtesy of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Smoking_and_Atherosclerosis.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235454407257.jpeg)

**Figure 26.14**

Plaque formation in artery leading to narrowing of artery.

</div>

The growth of plaques in the arteries is facilitated by a high level of
low-density lipoproteins (LDL), which transport cholesterol from the
liver to various parts of the body. The opposite process, moving
cholesterol back to the liver, is carried out by high-density
lipoproteins (HDL). Once back in the liver, the cholesterol can be
converted to bile acids, which are either excreted or used in the
digestion of dietary lipids.

When you get your cholesterol tested, they are measuring not only the
total amount of cholesterol in the blood, but also whether it is being
transported by LDL or HDL. All of these values are important for
assessing the likelihood of a heart attack. Total cholesterol gives an
idea of the overall cholesterol load in the body. The LDL cholesterol
(sometimes referred to as “bad” cholesterol) is more likely to be
incorporated into a cell or a plaque, so it is important that these
levels below. Conversely, since cholesterol being carried by HDL (“good”
cholesterol) is being transported away from the rest of the body and
into the liver for disposal, higher HDL levels are generally considered
beneficial.

High levels of cholesterol in the blood can be treated by medications.
The statins (a class of cholesterol-lowering drugs) inhibit the
production of cholesterol. One enzyme in the twenty-two step process is
rate-limiting – this enzyme catalyzes the slowest reaction in the
sequence. Blockage of cholesterol synthesis at this step is currently
the most effective way of decreasing cholesterol formation in the body.

## Lesson Summary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._2-6kg}

-   Lipids are a diverse class of relatively nonpolar biomolecules that
    generally do not dissolve well in water. Common types of lipids
    include fatty acids, triglycerides, phospholipids, and steroids.
-   Lipoproteins transport lipids in the bloodstream.
-   Triglycerides can be broken down into fatty acids, which can be
    further metabolized to produce acetyl CoA.
-   Acetyl CoA acts as a common intermediate for many
    metabolic pathways. It can be broken down further as a source of
    energy or used as a building block to generate more
    complex molecules.
-   Elevated levels of cholesterol in the blood can cause arterial
    damage, which may lead to a heart attack.

## Lesson Review Questions {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._2-8up}

1.  List four classes of lipids and their functions in the body.
2.  How are triglycerides digested in the small intestine?
3.  What are the functions of LDL and HDL?
4.  How can stored triglycerides be used for biochemical energy?
5.  How does high cholesterol contribute to a heart attack?

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#26.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._2-rcz}

-   Tutorial on lipid metabolism:
    [http://nfs.uvm.edu/nfs-new/activities/tutorials/lipid.html](lipid.html)

<!-- -->

-   Cholesterol and heart disease:
    [http://www.webmd.com/heart-disease/guide/heart-disease-lower-cholesterol-risk](heart-disease-lower-cholesterol-risk)

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686187] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686188] -->

# Nucleic Acids {#26.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVpYyBBY2lkcw..}

## Lesson Objectives {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIE9iamVjdGl2ZXM._3-dih}

-   Describe the structure of DNA.
-   Describe the structures of messenger RNA and transfer RNA.
-   Describe the process of protein synthesis.

## Lesson Vocabulary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFZvY2FidWxhcnk._3-cl6}

-   DNA
-   nucleotide
-   RNA
-   transcription
-   translation

## Check Your Understanding {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2hlY2sgWW91ciBVbmRlcnN0YW5kaW5n_3-zjf}

### Recalling Prior Knowledge {#26.html#x-ck12-UmVjYWxsaW5nIFByaW9yIEtub3dsZWRnZQ.._3-iz2}

-   What do we mean when we refer to the primary structure of a protein?

## Classes of Nucleic Acids {#26.html#x-ck12-Q2xhc3NlcyBvZiBOdWNsZWljIEFjaWRz_3-roa}

The final type of biomolecules that we will be looking at are the
nucleic acids. Like carbohydrates and proteins, nucleic acids are
complex polymers of a few simple building blocks. Nucleic acids provide
the molecular blueprints for all proteins produced in living systems. We
will explore the process by which this information is translated into
functional structures later in this lesson. First, we will look at the
structures of nucleic acids.

### Nucleotides {#26.html#x-ck12-TnVjbGVvdGlkZXM._3-8qr}

The subunits from which nucleic acids are generated are referred to as
**nucleotides** . A nucleotide consists of a pentose molecule connected
to a nitrogen-containing base and one or more phosphate groups.
Biological systems make use of two different pentoses for the
construction of nucleic acids: ribose and deoxyribose. Long polymers of
ribose-derived nucleotides are referred to as ribonucleic acids (
**RNA** ), and polymers of deoxyribose nucleotides are referred to as
deoxyribonucleic acids ( **DNA** ).

In a given strand of DNA or RNA, the only difference between each
subunit is the choice of base. The five common bases are shown in the
**Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfNF9udWNsZW90aWRlX3N0cnVjdHVyZXM.) .
Based on the number of rings, they are classified as either purines or
pyrimidines.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-N2IwNDUxODY4M2NjNzU4N2Y2ZWFlMWY1OWQyMjg3N2Q.-mdn"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Sjef/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nucleotides_1.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235454550747.png)

**Figure 26.15**

Nucleotide structures.

</div>

In general, DNA does not make use of the uracil base, and RNA does not
contain thymine. As a result, each strand of a nucleic acid will use
only four of these bases.

### DNA {#26.html#x-ck12-RE5B_3-dxv}

Individual nucleotides can be linked together through their phosphate
groups to form nucleic acid polymers. Once constructed, DNA generally
exists as two strands that are linked together by hydrogen bonds,
producing a double-helical structure (see **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfNF9ETkFfc3RydWN0dXJlcw..) ).

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-YmIzNzFhODI3OGQ0OGRkMWM5YzRkZDJhMTY3YTkwNjc.-mxs"
class="x-ck12-img-thumbnail x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Jerome Walker, Dennis Myts" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DNA_double_helix_vertikal.PNG" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235454683270.png)

**Figure 26.16**

DNA structure.

</div>

In order for the structure in **Figure**
[above](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfNF9ETkFfc3RydWN0dXJlcw..) to form,
the bases that line up across from each other must be complementary to
one another. Based on their structures, adenine will make favorable
hydrogen bonding interactions with thymine, and vice versa. Guanine and
cytosine form another complementary pair. Mismatched bases will form
unfavorable interactions in the center of the helix.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-NTdlNzZkYzE2M2U4OWVjZDEzYjMyZjg4NGQ1OTYxOGI.-ort"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundadtion" --> <!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235454799831.png)

**Figure 26.17**

Base pairing in DNA.

</div>

If we know the sequence of one strand in a DNA double helix, we can
predict the sequence of the opposite strand based on the required
pairings.

### RNA {#26.html#x-ck12-Uk5B_3-xex}

RNA is nearly identical to DNA, except that the sugar has an extra OH
group and uracil is used instead of thymine. Due to the additional
hydrogen bonding opportunities generated by the extra OH group, RNA is
found more often as a single strand that is folded in on itself.
However, RNA can still form a double helix with a strand of either DNA
or RNA if the bases form a complementary sequence.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-NzFjZmQ1YWZjYTY3ZDZjZWY0ODk0NzRhZjI1ZjNmNzE.-yhl"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Sponk/Wikimedia Commons" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:RNA-Nucleobases.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235454927563.png)

**Figure 26.18**

RNA structure.

</div>

RNA is sometimes classified based on the function that it is performing.
The types most relevant to the production of proteins are messenger RNA
(mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). We will look at
the role of each type of RNA in the following section.

## Protein Synthesis {#26.html#x-ck12-UHJvdGVpbiBTeW50aGVzaXM._3-ukb}

The process of protein synthesis is summarized in the **Figure**
[below](#26.html#x-ck12-QkNoZW1fMjZfNF9wcm90ZWluX3N5bnRoZXNpcw..) . DNA
produces an RNA template that directs the amino acids to be introduced
into the growing protein chain in the proper sequence. A specific
transfer RNA attaches to each amino acid and brings it to the RNA for
incorporation.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-ZTk4MjRjZjdlZmQxNDE5MzI4ZGViOWU1MTU0OTUyMWQ.-60o"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="National Institutes of Health" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MRNA-interaction.png" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235455132109.png)

**Figure 26.19**

Overview of protein synthesis.

</div>

The first step in the process is **transcription** - the unfolding of
DNA and the production of an mRNA strand. This step takes place in the
nucleus of the cell.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-MjgwYmY0YzEzYTdiYTc3ODVjZjEyMmQzYTI0ZWU0ZWQ.-bts"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="User:Calibuon/En.Wikibooks" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Transcription.jpg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235455249136.jpeg)

**Figure 26.20**

Formation of RNA from DNA.

</div>

The DNA uncoils and provides the pattern for the formation of a single
strand of mRNA. After production of the RNA, the DNA refolds into the
original double helix. The mRNA is exported to the cytoplasm (outside
the nucleus) for further processing.

Amino acids will link with specific transfer RNA molecules for proper
placement in the protein chain. The tRNA is a small coiled molecule that
accepts an amino acid on one end and matches up to a specific three-base
portion of the mRNA on the other end. The tRNA interacts with the mRNA
so as to put the amino acids in the proper sequence for the developing
protein. After adding the amino acid to the sequence, the tRNA is
cleaved from the amino acid and recycled for further participation in
the process. Because we are converting from one "language" to another (a
sequence of mRNA bases into a sequence of amino acids), this part of the
process is referred to as **translation** .

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-MmY2NzA2OWY5OGY1MGNkYTM4MWY2YTg3ZTM4M2VmZDk.-suw"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Laura Guerin" --> <!-- @@url="CK-12 Foundation" -->
<!-- @@license="CC BY-NC 3.0" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235455454742.png)

**Figure 26.21**

</div>

The process of assembling amino acids into a protein takes place in the
ribosome. This structure consists of two subunits, each of which is
composed of both proteins and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). The two subunits
clamp together on the mRNA and catalyze the formation of the amide
linkages in the growing protein. When protein synthesis is complete, the
two subunits dissociate and release the completed protein chain.

The process of protein synthesis is fairly fast. Amino acids are added
to the growing peptide chain at a rate of about 3-5 amino acids per
second. A smaller protein (100-200 amino acids) can be produced in a
minute or less.

<div
id="26.html#x-ck12-NjA4OGQ4ZDA2Y2QzNzYyN2IxMGRmNmVjNGNmMWIzYTk.-9r4"
class="x-ck12-img-postcard x-ck12-nofloat">

<!-- @@author="Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons)" -->
<!-- @@url="http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TRNA_ribosomes_diagram_en.svg" -->
<!-- @@license="Public Domain" -->
![](ck12_26_files/20151009235455607130.png)

**Figure 26.22**

Role of ribosome in protein synthesis.

</div>

## Lesson Summary {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFN1bW1hcnk._3-ix5}

-   Nucleotides contain a pentose sugar, a nitrogen-containing base, and
    one or more phosphate groups.
-   Nucleic acids, such as DNA and RNA, are composed of long strands of
    nucleotides bonded together through their phosphate groups.
-   DNA generally exists as two complementary strands connected by
    hydrogen bonds into a double helix structure.
-   DNA contains the genetic information for the production of proteins.
-   The transcription process produces a strand of messenger RNA
    from DNA.
-   During translation, messenger RNA interacts with the ribosome and
    transfer RNA to produce a protein.

## Lesson Review Questions {#26.html#x-ck12-TGVzc29uIFJldmlldyBRdWVzdGlvbnM._3-mkx}

1.  Describe the differences in structure between DNA and RNA.
2.  Describe the process of transcription.
3.  Describe the structure of transfer RNA.
4.  Describe how translation leads to synthesis of a new protein.

## Further Reading/Supplementary Links {#26.html#x-ck12-RnVydGhlciBSZWFkaW5nL1N1cHBsZW1lbnRhcnkgTGlua3M._3-o0t}

-   Structures of nucleic acids:
    [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21514](NBK21514)

<!-- -->

-   Animation of the translation process in protein synthesis:
    [http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ikq9AcBcohA](watch?v=Ikq9AcBcohA)

<!-- -->

-   Animation of protein synthesis:
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Translation.gif](File:Translation.gif)

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686188] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

# References {#26.html#x-ck12-UmVmZXJlbmNlcw..-pqw}

1.  User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons;
    User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons.
    [https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:D-glucose-chain-2D-Fischer.png](File:D-glucose-chain-2D-Fischer.png) .
    Public Domain
2.  User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Alpha-D-Glucopyranose.svg](File:Alpha-D-Glucopyranose.svg) .
    Public Domain
3.  User:NEUROtiker/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:L-Aminos%C3%A4ure\_Rest.svg](File:L-Aminos%C3%A4ure_Rest.svg) .
    Public Domain
4.  User:YassineMrabet/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Peptidformationball.svg](File:Peptidformationball.svg) .
    Public Domain
5.  Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Main\_protein\_structure\_levels\_en.svg](File:Main_protein_structure_levels_en.svg) .
    Public Domain
6.  User:Adamandalex/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Succinate\_Dehydrogenase.jpg](File:Succinate_Dehydrogenase.jpg) .
    Public Domain
7.  User:TimVickers/Wikimedia Commons and
    User:Fvasconcellos/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Induced\_fit\_diagram.svg](File:Induced_fit_diagram.svg) .
    Public Domain
8.  Courtesy of Todd L. Mollan, CBER, US Food and Drug Administration.
    [http://blogs.fda.gov/fdavoice/index.php/tag/blood-substitutes/]() .
    Public Domain
9.  Ich.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Haemoglobin.svg](File:Haemoglobin.svg) .
    Public Domain
10. The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sickle\_cell\_01.jpg](File:Sickle_cell_01.jpg) .
    Public Domain
11. User:Roadnottaken/Wikipedia.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Common\_lipids.png](File:Common_lipids.png) .
    Public Domain
12. Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
13. CK-12 Foundation. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC
    3.0
14. Courtesy of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Smoking\_and\_Atherosclerosis.jpg](File:Smoking_and_Atherosclerosis.jpg) .
    Public Domain
15. User:Sjef/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nucleotides\_1.svg](File:Nucleotides_1.svg) .
    Public Domain
16. Jerome Walker, Dennis Myts.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:DNA\_double\_helix\_vertikal.PNG](File:DNA_double_helix_vertikal.PNG) .
    Public Domain
17. Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (LadyofHats) for CK-12 Foundation. [CK-12
    Foundadtion](CK-12%20Foundadtion) . CC BY-NC 3.0
18. User:Sponk/Wikimedia Commons.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:RNA-Nucleobases.svg](File:RNA-Nucleobases.svg) .
    Public Domain
19. National Institutes of Health.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MRNA-interaction.png](File:MRNA-interaction.png) .
    Public Domain
20. User:Calibuon/En.Wikibooks.
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Transcription.jpg](File:Transcription.jpg) .
    Public Domain
21. Laura Guerin. [CK-12 Foundation](CK-12%20Foundation) . CC BY-NC 3.0
22. Mariana Ruiz Villarreal (User:LadyofHats/Wikimedia Commons).
    [http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TRNA\_ribosomes\_diagram\_en.svg](File:TRNA_ribosomes_diagram_en.svg) .
    Public Domain

<span id="27.html"></span>

# Glossary {#27.html#x-ck12-R2xvc3Nhcnk.-chapter}

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>

<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686190] -->

# A {#27.html#x-ck12-QQ..}

 absolute zero 
:   In 1848 Lord Kelvin observed what happened to the volume of a gas as
    its temperature fell. For every 1°C drop in temperature, the gas
    contracted almost uniformly by 1/273th of its volume at 0°C. He
    interpreted this to mean that the volume must fall to zero at
    -273°C, absolute zero.

<!-- -->

 accuracy 
:   Describes how close a given set of data is to the “real” value.

<!-- -->

 acid 
:   Any compound that produces hydrogen ions (H ^+^ ) in water.

<!-- -->

 activation energy 
:   The energy that is needed to get reactants close enough together for
    a reaction to occur.

<!-- -->

 activity series 
:   The electromotive series (or activity series) ranks metals in terms
    of their ability to participate in oxidation-reduction reactions.

<!-- -->

 adhesion 
:   Ability to stick to other substances.

<!-- -->

 alchemist 
:   A practitioner of the medieval science of alchemy, which aimed
    mainly to transform everyday metals into gold.

<!-- -->

 alcohol 
:   The alcohol functional group is R-OH where R can represent any
    specific carbon structure. Alcohols can be primary, secondary,
    or tertiary.

<!-- -->

 aldehyde 
:   Has a double-bonded carbon-oxygen bond (one sigma bond and one
    pi bond). The carbon to which the oxygen is attached has one
    hydrogen atom connected to it.

<!-- -->

 alkane 
:   Contains only carbon-carbon single bonds.

<!-- -->

 alkene 
:   Contains one or more carbon-carbon double bonds.

<!-- -->

 alkyne 
:   Contains one or more carbon-carbon triple bonds.

<!-- -->

 allotrope 
:   Multiple physical forms where one element can exist.

<!-- -->

 alloy 
:   A solid solution either of two or more metals, or of a metal or
    metals with one or more nonmetals.

<!-- -->

 alpha helix 
:   One basic form of secondary structure.

<!-- -->

 alpha particle 
:   This emission consists of a helium nucleus.

<!-- -->

 amalgam 
:   Special type of alloy used for a variety of purposes, including
    dentistry and gold extraction.

<!-- -->

 amide bond 
:   Links individual acids together.

<!-- -->

 amide 
:   Forms between a carboxylic acid and an amine.

<!-- -->

 amine 
:   Functional group consists of a C attached to a N. There can be three
    different classes of amines: primary, secondary, and tertiary.

<!-- -->

 amorphous solid 
:   Solid that lacks an ordered internal structure.

<!-- -->

 anion 
:   Negatively charged ion.

<!-- -->

 anode 
:   The electrode at which oxidation occurs.

<!-- -->

 Arrhenius acid 
:   Produces a proton in solution.

<!-- -->

 Arrhenius base 
:   Produces a hydroxide ion in solution.

<!-- -->

 atmospheric pressure 
:   The force exerted by a hypothetical column of gas that stretches
    from sea level to the outer reaches of the atmosphere.

<!-- -->

 atom 
:   Matter is composed of these tiny indivisible particles.

<!-- -->

 atomic mass 
:   The weighted average of the atomic masses of the naturally occurring
    isotopes of that element.

<!-- -->

 atomic number 
:   Is equal to the number of protons in its nucleus.

<!-- -->

 atomic radius 
:   The distance from an atom's nucleus to the outermost orbital
    of electron.

<!-- -->

 Aufbau Principle 
:   States that as protons are added one by one to the nucleus of an
    atom to build up the elements, electrons are similarly added to the
    atomic orbitals.

<!-- -->

 Avogadro’s number 
:   Defined as 6.022 × 10 ^23^ . It is a number used to describe amounts
    of atoms and molecules.

<!-- -->

 A-Z notation 
:   The composition of any atom can be illustrated with this
    shorthand notation.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686190] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686191] -->

# B {#27.html#x-ck12-Qg..}

 balanced chemical equation 
:   The number of each specific atom that exists as a reactant must
    equal the number of that atom in the products.

<!-- -->

 barometer 
:   Instrument that measures pressure.

<!-- -->

 base unit 
:   Measurements that have their own independent scale and cannot be
    expressed in terms of other base units.

<!-- -->

 base 
:   Compounds which contain hydroxide ions.

<!-- -->

 battery 
:   Used oxidation-reduction reactions to generate electron flow which
    can be employed for useful work.

<!-- -->

 beta particle 
:   This emission involves the conversion of a neutron to a proton
    (which remains in the nucleus) and an electron (beta particle) which
    is ejected from the nucleus.

<!-- -->

 beta-pleated sheet 
:   One basic form of secondary structure.

<!-- -->

 bimolecular reaction 
:   Two different reactants interact to form products.

<!-- -->

 binary acid 
:   Acids in which the acidic hydrogen atom(s) are bound directly to an
    atom other than oxygen.

<!-- -->

 binding energy 
:   Energy that is released that holds the nucleus together.

<!-- -->

 boiling point elevation 
:   If we dissolve a known amount of solute in a known amount of water
    and measure the boiling point of the solution, the boiling point
    will be elevated.

<!-- -->

 boiling point 
:   Temperature at which liquid transitions to gas.

<!-- -->

 Boyle’s Law 
:   For a fixed amount of gas at constant temperature, the volume is
    inversely proportional to its pressure.

<!-- -->

 brittleness 
:   Can break or shatter without deformation.

<!-- -->

 Brønsted-Lowry acid 
:   Donates a proton.

<!-- -->

 Brønsted-Lowry base 
:   Accepts a proton.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686191] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686192] -->

# C {#27.html#x-ck12-Qw..}

 calibration 
:   A method of setting or correcting a measuring device by matching it
    to known measurement standards.

<!-- -->

 cancer 
:   These cells have an abnormal structure due to the damaged DNA. In
    addition, they usually grow rapidly since the normal control
    processes regulating cell growth have been changed by the altered
    composition of the DNA.

<!-- -->

 carbohydrate 
:   Has the general structure C ~n~ (H ~2~ O) ~n~ . Can be classified in
    terms of chain length. Can be classified as monosaccharides,
    disaccharides, or polysaccharides.

<!-- -->

 catalyst 
:   Material that speeds up the rate of reaction without undergoing any
    change itself.

<!-- -->

 cathode 
:   The electrode at which reduction occurs.

<!-- -->

 cation 
:   Positively charged ion.

<!-- -->

 Celsius scale 
:   Defines the normal freezing point and boiling point of water as 0°C
    and 100°C, respectively.

<!-- -->

 Charles’s Law 
:   States that the volume of a given mass of a gas, with constant
    pressure, is proportional to temperature.

<!-- -->

 chemical change 
:   A change during which the chemical identity of a substance
    is altered. Chemical changes are often accompanied by a change in
    color, temperature, or odor, or the production of a gas
    or precipitate.

<!-- -->

 chemical equilibrium 
:   The study of the forward and reverse nature of chemical processes.

<!-- -->

 chemical property 
:   A property that describes the ability of a substance to undergo a
    specific chemical change.

<!-- -->

 chemical species 
:   Atoms, ions, elements, compounds, etc., that take place in a
    chemical reaction.

<!-- -->

 chemistry 
:   The science of the properties, reaction, composition, and structures
    of matter.

<!-- -->

 cholesterol 
:   Contains a four-ring system with a hydrocarbon side chain.

<!-- -->

 chromatography 
:   The separation of a mixture by passing it through a medium in which
    the components move at different rates. This can be done as a liquid
    solution, a suspension, or a vapor (as in gas chromatography).

<!-- -->

 combustion 
:   Occurs when a hydrocarbon reacts in the presence of oxygen to
    produce water and carbon dioxide.

<!-- -->

 cohesion 
:   Ability to stick to itself.

<!-- -->

 colligative properties 
:   Affected strictly by the amount of solute added and not the type of
    solute added.

<!-- -->

 collision theory 
:   Molecules need to collide in order for a reaction to take place.

<!-- -->

 colloid 
:   A mixture that is not totally homogeneous, nor
    totally heterogeneous.

<!-- -->

 combination reaction 
:   Two chemical species combine to produce a new compound. The general
    expression for this reaction is A + B → C.

<!-- -->

 compounds 
:   Substances with a constant composition that can be broken down into
    two or more elements by chemical processes.

<!-- -->

 continuous theory of matter 
:   It was thought that matter could be divided and subdivided into
    smaller and smaller pieces without limit.

<!-- -->

 conversion factor 
:   Used in solving problems in which a certain measurement must be
    expressed with different units.

<!-- -->

 copper cycle 
:   A series of chemical reactions where an initial amount of copper
    reacts with nitric acid, goes into solution, and disappears. Then a
    series of reactions proceed, only to have the copper
    metal recovered. The copper cycle is a good illustration of how mass
    is conserved in a given chemical reaction.

<!-- -->

 corrosion 
:   Involves the formation of an oxidized form of a metal by an
    electrochemical process.

<!-- -->

 covalent bond 
:   Forms when two or more elements share electrons.

<!-- -->

 covalent compounds 
:   Nonionic (not composed of cations and anions) substances that are
    comprised of nonmetals.

<!-- -->

 crystal lattice 
:   A geometric arrangement of points in space at which the atoms,
    molecules, or ions of a crystal occur.

<!-- -->

 crystalline solid 
:   Arranged in a geometric, organized, three-dimensional structure. Has
    definite melting point and shape.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686192] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686193] -->

# D {#27.html#x-ck12-RA..}

 Dalton’s law of partial pressures 
:   States that the total pressure of the mixture is the sum of the
    partial pressures of each gas component.

<!-- -->

 decomposition reaction 
:   The exact opposite of a combination process. A chemical species
    breaks down to produce two new chemical species. The general
    expression for this reaction is C → A + B.

<!-- -->

 deductive reasoning 
:   Takes a general principle and then draws a specific conclusion from
    the general concept.

<!-- -->

 dehydration 
:   Chemical reaction that results in a loss of water.

<!-- -->

 dehydrohalogenation 
:   When an alkene is acquired by an alkyl halide during an
    organic reaction. An example of elimination reaction.

<!-- -->

 density 
:   An expression of the amount of space occupied by a given mass of
    a substance.

<!-- -->

 derived unit 
:   Combinations of base units.

<!-- -->

 dew point 
:   Temperature needed for water vapor to condense into water.

<!-- -->

 diatomic gas 
:   Where two nitrogen atoms are held together by triple bonds.

<!-- -->

 diffusion 
:   The rate at which two gases mix. Inversely proportional to the
    density of the gas.

<!-- -->

 dilution 
:   Process requires adding more solvent to the initial
    concentrated solution.

<!-- -->

 dimensional analysis 
:   A technique that uses the units (dimensions) of the measurement in
    order to correctly solve problems.

<!-- -->

 disaccharide 
:   Composed of two monosaccharides

<!-- -->

 discontinuous theory of matter 
:   Believed matter was actually finite and not limitless.

<!-- -->

 dispersed phase 
:   A substance in the colloidal stage.

<!-- -->

 dispersion force 
:   Attractive forces that arise as a result of temporary dipoles
    induced in atoms or molecules. Also referred to as van der Waals
    forces or interactions.

<!-- -->

 dispersion medium 
:   The medium where a disperse phase is distributed.

<!-- -->

 dissociate 
:   When ions break apart from a lattice and go into solution.

<!-- -->

 dissolution 
:   The process where water interacts with the ions within the crystal
    lattice, causing the lattice to break apart.

<!-- -->

 dissolving 
:   When one substance dissolves in another. This process requires there
    be a solvent and a solute that interact to produce a
    homogeneous solution.

<!-- -->

 distillation 
:   A purification process where the components of a liquid mixture are
    vaporized and then condensed and isolated.

<!-- -->

 DNA 
:   Deoxyribonucleic acid. Consists of two chains of nucleotides that
    connect to one another in a double helix. Contains the genetic
    information for the accurate production of proteins.

<!-- -->

 double displacement 
:   Typically includes two soluble salts that react with one another in
    aqueous media. The general form of this reaction is AB + CD → AD +
    CB.

<!-- -->

 dry cell battery 
:   Uses a paste in a casing containing two different metals.

<!-- -->

 ductility 
:   Can be stretched, bent, or twisted without breaking.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686193] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686194] -->

# E {#27.html#x-ck12-RQ..}

 effective nuclear charge 
:   When an electron is in a multi-electron atom, it produces this net
    positive charge.

<!-- -->

 effusion 
:   Rate at which a gas escapes through a pinhole into a vacuum.
    Inversely proportional to the molar mass of the gas.

<!-- -->

 elastic collision 
:   Collisions are elastic. Momentum is conserved. No energy is lost
    through collisions.

<!-- -->

 electrolysis 
:   Is a process that uses electrons to cause certain chemical reactions
    to occur.

<!-- -->

 electron configurations 
:   Arrangement of all the electrons of that atom.

<!-- -->

 electron shielding 
:   As more electrons are added to a nucleus, the outer electrons become
    shielded from the nucleus by the inner shell electrons.

<!-- -->

 electron 
:   Negatively charged and has a very small mass compared to the mass of
    other subatomic particles. Electrons were initially called
    cathode rays.

<!-- -->

 electronegativity 
:   Electronegativity (EN) is a measure of the relative tendency of an
    atom to attract electrons to itself when chemically combined with
    another atom.

<!-- -->

 elements 
:   Substances that cannot be decomposed into simpler substances by
    chemical or physical means.

<!-- -->

 empirical formula 
:   The smallest whole number ratio of the numbers of atoms in
    a compound.

<!-- -->

 emulsifying agent 
:   A substance that inhibits coagulation of colloidal particles and
    covers the particles of the dispersed phase.

<!-- -->

 emulsion 
:   If there are liquid-dispersed particles in liquid phase.

<!-- -->

 endothermic reaction 
:   A reaction that requires heat for the reaction to take place.

<!-- -->

 enthalpy 
:   A thermodynamic function of a system, equivalent to the sum of the
    internal energy of the system plus the product of its volume
    multiplied by the pressure exerted on it by its surroundings. The
    symbol for enthalpy is H.

<!-- -->

 enthalpy of reaction 
:   When a mole of matter is altered by a chemical reaction under
    standard conditions, a change of enthalpy takes place.

<!-- -->

 entropy 
:   A thermodynamic function that describes the number of arrangements
    that are available to a system existing in a given state. A measure
    of randomness or disorder. The symbol of entropy is S.

<!-- -->

 enzyme 
:   Catalyzes biochemical reactions.

<!-- -->

 equilibrium constant 
:   Relates the concentrations of materials on both sides of the
    reaction arrow at equilibrium.

<!-- -->

 equilibrium expression 
:   Can be used to describe changes for a chemical reaction.

<!-- -->

 equivalence point 
:   The point in a neutralization reaction where the number of moles of
    hydrogen ions is equal to the number of moles of hydroxide ions.

<!-- -->

 ester 
:   Formed from a reaction between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid.

<!-- -->

 estimate 
:   As used in measurement, is the process of referencing a physical
    quantity in terms of a calibration or reference point.

<!-- -->

 ether 
:   The ether functional group consists of an oxygen atom which forms
    single bonds with two carbon atoms.

<!-- -->

 evaporation 
:   The process whereby atoms or molecules in a liquid state (or solid
    state, if the substance sublimes) gain sufficient energy to enter
    the gaseous state. This can be used as a technique to separate the
    liquid component of a homogeneous mixture from its dissolved solids.

<!-- -->

 exothermic reaction 
:   A reaction that releases heat during the course of the reaction.

<!-- -->

 extensive properties 
:   Properties that depend on the amount of a substance that is present.
    Examples include mass, volume, and length.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686194] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686195] -->

# F {#27.html#x-ck12-Rg..}

 Fahrenheit scale 
:   The most commonly used scale in the United States, defines the
    normal freezing point and boiling point of water as 32°F and
    212°F, respectively.

<!-- -->

 fatty acid 
:   Are cleaved from triglycerides in the small intestine.

<!-- -->

 filtration 
:   A method used to separate substances in mixtures where at least one
    component has particles that are large enough in size to be captured
    by a porous material.

<!-- -->

 first law of thermodynamics 
:   Energy can be converted from one form to another, but cannot be
    created or destroyed.

<!-- -->

 first-order reaction 
:   The rate is dependent upon the reactant concentration raised to the
    first power.

<!-- -->

 fission 
:   Nuclear fission reactions involve collision of a slow neuron with an
    element, usually uranium. The products of a fission reaction are two
    smaller isotopes, more neutrons, and heat energy.

<!-- -->

 force 
:   Ability to do work.

<!-- -->

 formula mass 
:   The sum of masses of all the atoms represented in a
    chemical formula.

<!-- -->

 free element 
:   Uncombined state where each atom has an oxidation number of zero.

<!-- -->

 freezing point depression 
:   The addition of solute to a pure solvent will decrease the freezing
    point of the solution by a measurable amount.

<!-- -->

 frequency 
:   Inversely proportional to wavelength. Photons with high frequency
    light have more energy than photons with low frequency light
    (Zukav 1979).

<!-- -->

 frost 
:   A solid form of water.

<!-- -->

 fuel cell 
:   Employ oxidation-reduction reactions of hydrogen and oxygen gases ad
    a platinum catalyst.

<!-- -->

 functional group 
:   In a compound, a group of atoms that define the behavior of
    the compound.

<!-- -->

 fusion 
:   This reactions are a potential source of power. Involves the
    collision of smaller atoms to form larger ones. Nuclear fusion
    reactions occur in stars.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686195] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686196] -->

# G {#27.html#x-ck12-Rw..}

 galvanic cell 
:   Otherwise known as a voltaic cell.

<!-- -->

 gamma emission 
:   The release of energy.

<!-- -->

 Gay-Lussac’s Law 
:   Gas law which states that the pressure of a given mass of a gas
    varies directly with the absolute temperature of the gas when the
    volume is kept constant.

<!-- -->

 glycolysis 
:   Means splitting of glucose.

<!-- -->

 Gibbs free energy 
:   A thermodynamic quantity that combines enthalpy and entropy into a
    single value that has been named after Josiah Gibbs, an
    American physicist. This value can be used to determine
    equilibrium constants.

<!-- -->

 gluconeogenesis 
:   Process that breaks down proteins and provides needed glucose for
    the cells.

<!-- -->

 glycogen 
:   Made up of long chains of glucose units.

<!-- -->

 gold foil experiment 
:   Ernest Rutherford discovered the presence of a positively charged
    nucleus with this experiment. He used a radioactive source to direct
    alpha particles toward a very thin sheet of gold foil. Surrounding
    the foil was a screen that fluoresced when struck by the
    alpha particles.

<!-- -->

 Graham’s law of effusion 
:   States that the rate of effusion or diffusion of a gas is inversely
    proportional to the square root of the molar mass of the gas.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686196] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686197] -->

# H {#27.html#x-ck12-SA..}

 half-reaction 
:   Contains only half the entire redox process. One half-reaction
    illustrates the oxidation component while the other half-reaction
    illustrates the reduction component.

<!-- -->

 halogenation 
:   Chemical reaction where a halogen atom is included in a molecule.

<!-- -->

 heat capacity 
:   The amount of heat need to raise a specified amount of material one
    degree Celsius. Can be calculated using the formula C=ms.

<!-- -->

 heat energy 
:   Chemical reactions involve a transfer of heat energy. Measured
    in joules.

<!-- -->

 Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle 
:   Heisenberg described mathematically the phenomena revealed by
    Young’s double slit experiment. He showed that it is impossible to
    determine simultaneously both the exact location and exact velocity
    of an electron or any other particle.

<!-- -->

 Henry’s Law 
:   Describes mathematically the relationship between the vapor pressure
    of the solution in terms of solute concentration.

<!-- -->

 Hess’s law 
:   States that regardless of the multiple stages or steps of a
    reaction, enthalpy change overall encompasses the sum of
    all changes.

<!-- -->

 heterogeneous mixtures 
:   Mixtures that include two or more distinct phases, which contain
    nonequivalent proportions of the mixture components.

<!-- -->

 homogeneous mixtures 
:   Mixtures that have a constant composition throughout.

<!-- -->

 humidity 
:   Quantity of water vapor in the air.

<!-- -->

 Hund’s Rule 
:   The rule states that orbitals of equal energy are each occupied by
    one electron before any orbital is occupied by a second electron,
    and all electrons in singly occupied orbitals must have the
    same spin.

<!-- -->

 hybridization 
:   The mixing of atomic orbitals in an atom (usually a central atom) to
    generate a set of hybrid orbitals.

<!-- -->

 hydrocarbon 
:   Contains only carbon and hydrogen.

<!-- -->

 hydrogen bond 
:   A “special case” dipole-dipole interaction.

<!-- -->

 hydrolysis 
:   When molecules of water are split into hydroxide anions and hydrogen
    cations (protons). Useful in the study of protein structure.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686197] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686198] -->

# I {#27.html#x-ck12-SQ..}

 ideal gas law 
:   PV=nRT.

<!-- -->

 ideal gas 
:   Gases that conform to the basic principles of
    kinetic-molecular theory.

<!-- -->

 immiscible 
:   Molecules don’t mix well together, and form a heterogeneous mixture-
    exhibiting a noticeable bilayer.

<!-- -->

 indicator 
:   Used to measure pH. Changes color depending on the pH of
    the solution.

<!-- -->

 inductive reasoning 
:   Involves getting a collection of specific examples and drawing a
    general conclusion from them.

<!-- -->

 initial rate of reaction 
:   The rate at the very beginning where the reactant concentration has
    not changed appreciably and the product concentration is negligible.

<!-- -->

 insoluble 
:   It does not dissolve, and it does not dissociate in water.

<!-- -->

 intensive properties 
:   Physical properties that do not depend on amount. Examples include
    color, taste, melting point, boiling point, density, luster,
    and hardness.

<!-- -->

 ion 
:   Formed when elements either gain or lose electrons.

<!-- -->

 ion-product constant 
:   An equilibrium constant. K ~w~ = \[H ^+^ \]\[OH ^-^ \] = 1.0 × 10
    ^-14^ at 25°C

<!-- -->

 ionic bond 
:   An electrostatic attraction between two ions that have
    exchanged electrons.

<!-- -->

 ionic compounds 
:   A compound formed by ions bonded together through
    electrostatic forces.

<!-- -->

 ionic equation 
:   An equation in which dissolved ionic compounds are shown as
    free ions.

<!-- -->

 ionic radius 
:   The radius exhibited by an ion in an ionic crystal where the ions
    are packed together to a point where their outermost electronic
    orbitals are in contact with each other.

<!-- -->

 ionization energy 
:   The energy required to remove an electron from a specific atom. It
    is measured in kJ/mol, which is an energy unit, much like calories.

<!-- -->

 isoelectric 
:   Having equal numbers of electrons or the same
    electronic configuration.

<!-- -->

 isotopes 
:   Atoms that have the same atomic number but different mass numbers
    due to a change in the number of neutrons.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686198] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686199] -->

# K {#27.html#x-ck12-Sw..}

 Kelvin scale 
:   Which is also referred to as the absolute temperature scale, defines
    absolute zero as the lowest theoretically possible temperature,
    which means that temperatures expressed in Kelvin cannot be
    negative numbers.

<!-- -->

 kernel electrons 
:   Interior electrons.

<!-- -->

 ketone 
:   Has a structure similar to that of aldehydes, except the ketone has
    two R groups attached to the carbon containing the C=O bond.
    Reactions of aldehydes and ketones are sometimes similar.

<!-- -->

 kinetic energy 
:   The energy of motion. Kinetic energy increases as the molecular mass
    increases and as the velocity of the particle increases.

<!-- -->

 kinetic-molecular theory 
:   Makes the following assumptions: 1. Gas particles are in constant,
    random motion. 2. The volume of gas particles is negligible in
    comparison to the volume of the container. 3. There are no
    attractive forces involved between gas particles. 4. Collisions of
    gas particles are elastic – no energy is lost. 5. The speed of a gas
    particle is proportional to the temperature of the system.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686199] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686200] -->

# L {#27.html#x-ck12-TA..}

 lattice energy 
:   Lattice energy of an ionic solid is a measure of the strength of
    bonds in that ionic compound.

<!-- -->

 law of conservation of mass 
:   For a closed system, the mass of the reactants must equal the mass
    of the products for any chemical process.

<!-- -->

 law of definite proportions 
:   Joseph Proust found that compounds always contain the same
    proportion of elements by mass, regardless of amount.

<!-- -->

 law of mass action 
:   A general expression that can be applied to any chemical reaction.

<!-- -->

 law of multiple proportions 
:   This law states that if two elements form more than one compound
    between them, then the ratios of the masses of the second element
    that combine with a fixed mass of the first element will be ratios
    of small whole numbers.

<!-- -->

 Le Chatelier’s Principle 
:   Describes how a chemical system will change to maintain equilibrium
    when a stress is applied.

<!-- -->

 Lewis acid 
:   Accepts an electron pair.

<!-- -->

 Lewis base 
:   Donates an electron pair.

<!-- -->

 Lewis structure 
:   A simple way of representing covalent bonds. Each dot in the
    structure represents one electron in the compound. Also known as
    Lewis dot structures.

<!-- -->

 light 
:   Behaves both as a particle and as a wave.

<!-- -->

 limiting reactant/reagent 
:   The reactant that is used up first in a reaction; the limiting
    reactant determines the amount of product that can be formed in a
    chemical reaction.

<!-- -->

 linear 
:   Molecule with atoms organized so the bond angle is 180 degrees
    between each of them.

<!-- -->

 line-emission spectrum 
:   Frequencies of electromagnetic radiation given off by a compound’s
    molecules or element’s atoms.

<!-- -->

 lipid 
:   Does not possess a unique structure. Lipids are better defined by
    the fact that they are not particularly soluble in water. Classes
    include fatty acids, triglycerides, phospholipids, and cholesterol.

<!-- -->

 lipoprotein 
:   Transports lipids in the bloodstream.

<!-- -->

 lone pair 
:   A couple of opposite spin valence electrons that are accountable for
    the development of coordinate bonds and are not shared
    between atoms.

<!-- -->

 lustrous 
:   Glowing.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686200] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686201] -->

# M {#27.html#x-ck12-TQ..}

 malleability 
:   Can be stamped, hammered, forged, pressed or rolled into
    thin sheets.

<!-- -->

 mass 
:   Measure of the amount of matter that an object contains.

<!-- -->

 mass number 
:   The total number of protons and neutrons in an atom.

<!-- -->

 mass spectrometer 
:   An instrument developed in 1918 by Arthur Jeffrey Dempster.
    Determines the masses of atoms, molecules, and molecular fragments.

<!-- -->

 matter 
:   Anything that has mass and takes up space.

<!-- -->

 melting point 
:   Temperature at which solid transitions to liquid.

<!-- -->

 meniscus 
:   In a standing body of liquid, this is the curve in the top surface
    of the liquid.

<!-- -->

 miscible 
:   Molecules mix well with one another, and form a homogeneous mixture.

<!-- -->

 mixtures 
:   A physical combination of two or more pure substances. The
    proportions of the individual components may vary, and these
    components can be separated by physical methods.

<!-- -->

 molality 
:   The mass of the solution. Moles of solute per kg of solvent.
    Abbreviated as “m.”

<!-- -->

 molar heat of fusion 
:   The heat absorbed by one mole of a substance as it is converted from
    a solid to a liquid.

<!-- -->

 molar heat of vaporization 
:   The heat absorbed by one mole of a substance as it is converted from
    a liquid to a gas.

<!-- -->

 molar mass 
:   The mass of one mole of any given substance.

<!-- -->

 molar solubility 
:   Molar solubility of a gas is expressed by taking the inverse of
    Henry’s Law constant (kH) and multiplying it by the partial pressure
    of the gas above the solution.

<!-- -->

 molarity 
:   Total volume of solution. Moles of solute per liter of solution.
    Abbreviated as “M.”

<!-- -->

 mole fraction 
:   Expressed as x. It is the amount of a component n ~i~ divided by the
    total amount of all components in a mixture n ~tot~ .

<!-- -->

 mole ratio 
:   When we express the moles of reactants and products in terms of one
    another in a ratio.

<!-- -->

 molecular formula 
:   A formula indicating the numbers and types of atoms in a molecule.

<!-- -->

 molecular orbital 
:   The result of interactions of the atomic orbitals of the bonding
    atoms and are associated with the entire molecule.

<!-- -->

 monatomic 
:   Ions that consist of a single atom with either a positive or
    negative charge.

<!-- -->

 monoprotic acid 
:   Has one available hydrogen to react.

<!-- -->

 monosaccharide 
:   One basic unit or one molecule.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686201] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686202] -->

# N {#27.html#x-ck12-Tg..}

 net ionic equation 
:   For a reaction that includes only the species involved in
    the reaction.

<!-- -->

 neutralization 
:   This reaction involves H ^+^ + OH ^-^ → salt + water.

<!-- -->

 neutron 
:   A particle with a mass similar to that of the proton, but has no
    electrical charge. Neutrons also reside in the nucleus.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686202] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686203] -->

# O {#27.html#x-ck12-Tw..}

 octahedral 
:   Six atoms are evenly organized around a central atom.

<!-- -->

 octet rule 
:   States that atoms will lose, gain or share electrons to achieve the
    electron configuration of the nearest noble gas (8 valence electrons
    except for He with 2).

<!-- -->

 orbital 
:   A three-dimensional region around the nucleus that indicates the
    probable location of the electron.

<!-- -->

 oxidation number 
:   Used to describe the state of an element’s electrons as it undergoes
    a chemical change.

<!-- -->

 oxidation 
:   Involves the loss of hydrogen, the gain of oxygen, or the loss
    of electrons.

<!-- -->

 oxidation-reduction reaction 
:   Oxidation and reduction both occur within the same reaction- one or
    more atoms are oxidized while one or more different atoms
    are reduced. Simply referred to as a redox reaction. There are 4
    types of reactions are combination, decomposition, displacement,
    and combustion.

<!-- -->

 oxidizing agent 
:   Causes the oxidation of another species in the reaction.

<!-- -->

 oxyacid 
:   Compounds comprised of at least one oxygen atom as part of their
    molecular structure.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686203] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686204] -->

# P {#27.html#x-ck12-UA..}

 partial pressure 
:   The pressure that each individual gas exerts.

<!-- -->

 Pauli exclusion principle 
:   No two electrons in same atom can have the same set of four
    quantum numbers.

<!-- -->

 percent abundance 
:   The percentage of atoms in a naturally occurring sample of the pure
    element that are a particular isotope.

<!-- -->

 percent error 
:   An expression of the accuracy of a measurement, standardized to how
    large the measurement is.

<!-- -->

 percent uncertainty 
:   The ratio of the uncertainty to the measured value, multiplied by
    one hundred.

<!-- -->

 percent yield 
:   The ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield, expressed as
    a percentage.

<!-- -->

 periodic law 
:   States that when elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic
    number, there is a periodic repetition of their chemical and
    physical properties.

<!-- -->

 periodicity 
:   Repetitive variations or trends in element properties.

<!-- -->

 PET 
:   Positron emission tomography (PET), often referred to as a PET scan.
    One of the more useful approaches to radioisotope use in medicine.
    This technique is useful in studying the processes in the brain.

<!-- -->

 pH 
:   The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration.

<!-- -->

 philosopher’s stone 
:   A substance that could cause the transmutation of lead into gold.

<!-- -->

 phlogiston 
:   Substance previously thought to be a unstable component of all
    combustible substances.

<!-- -->

 photoelectric effect 
:   Under the right conditions, light can be used to eject electrons
    from a solid material.

<!-- -->

 photoemissive 
:   Materials that eject electrons when illuminated with light, such
    as potassium.

<!-- -->

 photon 
:   A particle of light.

<!-- -->

 physical change 
:   A change that affects the form of a chemical substance but does not
    change its chemical composition.

<!-- -->

 physical properties 
:   Those properties that can be observed or measured without changing
    the composition of the matter. Physical properties of matter include
    mass, weight, volume, and density.

<!-- -->

 pi bond 
:   Not connected directly between the two atoms, but above and
    below them.

<!-- -->

 plum pudding model 
:   J. J. Thomson postulated that the atom was comprised of negatively
    charged particles in a disperse field of positive charge (positively
    charged particles had not yet been discovered). This proposed
    arrangement was compared to the arrangement of plums in
    plum pudding.

<!-- -->

 polarity 
:   Polar molecules contain one or more atoms which possess either a
    partial positive or a partial negative charge.

<!-- -->

 polyatomic 
:   Charged molecules comprised more than two elements.

<!-- -->

 polymer 
:   Are long-chain materials with useful properties.

<!-- -->

 polyprotic acid 
:   Has two or three available hydrogen to react.

<!-- -->

 polysaccharide 
:   Made up of many monosaccharides.

<!-- -->

 positron 
:   This emission involves the conversion of a proton in the nucleus to
    a neutron (remaining the in the nucleus) and an ejected positron
    (positive electron).

<!-- -->

 precision 
:   Describes how close estimates are to one another.

<!-- -->

 pressure 
:   Applied force per unit area on a surface.

<!-- -->

 primary structure 
:   The amino acid sequence.

<!-- -->

 product-favored equilibrium 
:   At the equilibrium, the concentration of products is large and the
    concentration of reactants is small.

<!-- -->

 proton 
:   Positively charged and has a relatively large mass compared
    to electrons. They can be found in the nucleus of the atom.

<!-- -->

 pure substances 
:   Substances with a constant composition that can only be broken down
    to their constituent parts by chemical means.

<!-- -->

 pyramidal 
:   Geometry of a molecule with an equilateral triangle of 3 atoms and
    one atom right above.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686204] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686205] -->

# Q {#27.html#x-ck12-UQ..}

 quantum (plural - quanta) 
:   Minimum quantity of energy that can either be lost or gained by
    an atom.

<!-- -->

 quantum numbers 
:   We use these series of specific numbers to describe the location of
    an electron in an associated atom.

<!-- -->

 quantum theory 
:   Describes the allowed energies of molecules and atoms.

<!-- -->

 quaternary structure 
:   Only possessed by proteins that have more than one subunit.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686205] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686206] -->

# R {#27.html#x-ck12-Ug..}

 radioactivity 
:   Involves the release of particles and/or energy from the nucleus of
    an atom.

<!-- -->

 Raoult’s Law 
:   States that vapor pressure of a solution equals the product of the
    vapor pressure of the pure solvent and the mole fraction of solvent,
    as described by: P = x ~solvent~ P°.

<!-- -->

 reactant-favored equilibrium 
:   At the equilibrium, the concentration of products is small and the
    concentration of reactants is large.

<!-- -->

 reaction mechanism 
:   Follows a reaction pathway going from initial reactants to
    final products. Describes the intermediate steps in a reaction.

<!-- -->

 reaction quotient 
:   A function of the actions of a chemical species in a
    chemical reaction. The symbol for this is Q.

<!-- -->

 reaction rate 
:   The change in concentration of a reactant or product with time.

<!-- -->

 reaction yield 
:   The amount of product that is actually produced in a given
    chemical reaction.

<!-- -->

 reactor 
:   Nuclear reactors heat water to steam to drive a turbine for
    generation of electricity.

<!-- -->

 reducing agent 
:   Causes a reduction of another species in the reaction.

<!-- -->

 reduction 
:   The gain of hydrogen, the loss of oxygen, or the gain of electrons.

<!-- -->

 RNA 
:   Ribonucleic acid. The single-stranded polymer is also composed of
    bases linked by phosphate bridges.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686206] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686207] -->

# S {#27.html#x-ck12-Uw..}

 saturated 
:   When no more solid dissolves.

<!-- -->

 scientific method 
:   Developed mainly by Francis Bacon (1561-1626), a British scholar.
    Uses inductive reasoning and involves the following steps: 1. Ask
    a question. 2. Make observations. 3. Propose an explanation. 4.
    Design and carry out ways to test the hypothesis.

<!-- -->

 scientific notation 
:   A way to express numbers as the product of two numbers, such as a
    coefficient and the number 10 raised to a power.

<!-- -->

 second law of thermodynamics 
:   In any spontaneous process, there is always an increase in the
    entropy of the universe.

<!-- -->

 secondary structure 
:   The local coiling or folding of biopolymers.

<!-- -->

 sigma bond 
:   Made up of two overlapping electron orbitals and fills the space
    directly between the two atoms.

<!-- -->

 significant figures 
:   Figures associated with uncertainty of a measurement.

<!-- -->

 single displacement 
:   Includes a metal as one of the reactants and an acid or salt
    solution for the other reactant. The general form of this reaction
    is AB + C → AC + B.

<!-- -->

 solubility 
:   The degree to which a solute dissolves in a solvent.

<!-- -->

 soluble 
:   Can dissolve.

<!-- -->

 solute 
:   The substance that comprises the smaller amount in solution.

<!-- -->

 solution 
:   Has at least two components- the solute and solvent.

<!-- -->

 solvent 
:   The substance which comprises the larger component of the solution.

<!-- -->

 specific heat 
:   The amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of one gram of
    material by one degree Celsius.

<!-- -->

 spectator ion 
:   Ions that do not participate in the overall reaction.

<!-- -->

 spontaneous 
:   Occurs without outside intervention.

<!-- -->

 standard enthalpy of formation 
:   For any element in its most stable form it is zero. Can be
    calculated indirectly if the ΔH ~f~ values for each reactant and
    product are not known.

<!-- -->

 standard temperature and pressure (STP) 
:   The number of moles of a gas was related to volume at a specific
    temperature and pressure. The temperature was established at 25°C
    and the pressure at one atmosphere – these conditions are known
    as STP. Under these conditions, it was determined that 22.4 liters
    of a gas comprised one mole of that gas. With this information, we
    can determine amounts of a gas given the volume at STP.

<!-- -->

 steroid 
:   Organic compound that has a precise organization of four joined
    cycloalkane rings.

<!-- -->

 stoichiometric coefficient 
:   In the formula aA+bB → cC+dD, letters a, b, c, d are
    stoichiometric coefficients. This formula can describe any chemical
    reaction, where A and B are reactants and C and D are products.

<!-- -->

 Stoichiometry 
:   Area of chemistry that deals with the calculation of amounts of
    substances in a chemical reaction based on the balanced equation.

<!-- -->

 strong acid 
:   Ionizes completely in solution.

<!-- -->

 strong base 
:   Ionizes completely in solution.

<!-- -->

 supersaturated 
:   When the amount of solute dissolved exceeds the solubility of
    the solute. Occurs when a solution is saturated and the temperature
    slowly drops.

<!-- -->

 surface tension 
:   The amount of energy required to increase the surface of a liquid.

<!-- -->

 suspension 
:   A heterogeneous mixture in which some of the particles settle out of
    the mixture upon standing.

<!-- -->

 system 
:   The chemical reaction in a container.

<!-- -->

 systeme international (SI) 
:   An international governing body developed this metric system of
    units of measurement for scientists.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686207] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686208] -->

# T {#27.html#x-ck12-VA..}

 termolecular reaction 
:   Require the collision of three particles simultaneously.

<!-- -->

 tertiary structure 
:   Refers to the overall three-dimensional shape of the entire protein.
    Determined by the sequence of amino acids in the protein chain.

<!-- -->

 tetrahedral 
:   The four bonds take on a tetrahedral shape, again with each electron
    pair as far away as possible from other electron pairs.

<!-- -->

 theoretical yield 
:   The amount of substance that is calculated to be produced.

<!-- -->

 thermochemistry 
:   The study of energy relationships in chemical reactions.

<!-- -->

 titrant 
:   Reagent in a titration experiment.

<!-- -->

 titration 
:   An experiment where a volume of a solution of known concentration is
    added to a volume of another solution in order to determine
    its concentration.

<!-- -->

 toughness 
:   Ability to withstand shock and to be deformed without rupturing.

<!-- -->

 transcription 
:   The unfolding of DNA and the production of an mRNA strand. This step
    takes place in the nucleus of the cell.

<!-- -->

 translation 
:   Messenger RNA interacts with the ribosome and transfers RNA to
    produce a protein.

<!-- -->

 trigonal bipyramid 
:   One atom at the center with 5 at the corners. Bond angles around the
    atom are not the same.

<!-- -->

 trigonal planar 
:   The three fluorine atoms lie in a plane with the central boron atom.

<!-- -->

 triple point 
:   Point where all three states of matter can exist simultaneously.

<!-- -->

 Tyndall Effect 
:   The phenomenon in which light is scattered by very small particles
    in its path.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686208] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686209] -->

# U {#27.html#x-ck12-VQ..}

 uncertainty 
:   Expressed as one-half of the smallest difference between
    calibration marks. It can also be expressed as a percent. All
    measurements have an associated uncertainty.

<!-- -->

 universal gas constant 
:   A constant used with thermochemical equations. The symbol for this
    is R.

<!-- -->

 unsaturated 
:   There is a predictable amount of solute that can be dissolved at a
    specific temperature.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686209] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686210] -->

# V {#27.html#x-ck12-Vg..}

 valence electrons 
:   Electrons in the outermost shell (highest principal quantum number)
    of an atom and are those involved in chemical bonding.

<!-- -->

 valence 
:   Described by associating atomic volume with atomic mass.

<!-- -->

 van’t Hoff Factor 
:   Describes the number of moles of particles that dissociate from an
    ionic solid.

<!-- -->

 vapor pressure 
:   A measure of the force exerted by a gas above a liquid in a
    sealed container.

<!-- -->

 viscosity 
:   A measure of the fluid’s resistance to flow – the higher the
    viscosity, the slower the flow of the material.

<!-- -->

 voltage 
:   An electromotive force or potential difference.

<!-- -->

 volume 
:   Measure of the space occupied by a sample of matter.

<!-- -->

 VSEPR 
:   The basic premise of the valence-shell electron-pair
    repulsion (VSEPR) model is that electron pairs will align themselves
    as far apart from one another as possible.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686210] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686211] -->

# W {#27.html#x-ck12-Vw..}

 wavelength 
:   The distance between two crests of a wave of light. The color of
    light is related to its wavelength. This is inversely proportional
    to frequency.

<!-- -->

 weak acid 
:   Not ionized completely. Usually organic acids containing a
    carboxyl group.

<!-- -->

 weak base 
:   Not ionized completely.

<!-- -->

 weight 
:   Measure of force that is equal to the gravitational pull on
    an object.

<!-- -->

 weight percent 
:   The weight of solute divided by weight of solution.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686211] -->
<!-- Begin inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686212] -->

# Z {#27.html#x-ck12-Wg..}

 zero-order reaction 
:   The rate is independent of the concentration of the reactant.

<!-- End inserted XHTML [SECTION: 3686212] -->

<div class="x-ck12-data">

</div>
